my folks back it up back it up it
in person feedback I'll bring it back in
bring it back in it
down there
she's not in the game
Oh
that's right
yeah
yes
statement today that he won't be as
forthcoming as he wasn't opening stay
here oh you know I think he's going to
try to give all the facts that he feels
he can without jeopardizing Robert
Mueller's the special counsels
investigation but he is aware of those
lines since he has walked them for many
years and I think he will walk the line
today but with an eye towards he
wouldn't have agreed to publicly testify
if he wasn't willing to to give as much
information as he could about the
circumstances thanks very much
Oh
mycology Reba worry
director Comey and I appreciate your
willingness to appear before the
committee today and more importantly I
thank you for your dedicated service and
leadership to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation your appearance today
speaks to the trust we have built over
the years and I'm looking forward to a
very open and candid discussion today
I'd like to remind my colleagues that we
will reconvene in closed session at 1:00
p.m. today and I ask that you reserve
for that venue any questions that might
get into classified information the
director has been very gracious with his
time but the vice chairman and I have
worked out a very specific timeline for
his commitment to be on the hill so we
will do everything we can to meet that
agreement the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence exists to certify for the
other 85 members of the United States
Senate and the American people that the
intelligence community is operating
lawfully and has the necessary
authorities and tools to accomplish its
mission and keep America safe part of
our mission beyond the oversight we
continue to provide to the intelligence
community and its activities is to
investigate Russian interference in the
2016 US elections the committee's work
continues this hearing represents part
of that effort
Jim allegations have been swirling in
the press for the last several weeks and
today's your opportunity to set the
record straight yesterday I read with
interest your statement for the record
and I think it provides some helpful
details surrounding your interactions
with the president it clearly lays out
your understanding of those discussions
actions you took following each
conversation and your state of mind
I very much appreciate your candor I
think it's helpful as we work through to
determine the ultimate truth behind
possible Russian interference in the
2016 elections your statement also
provides texture and context to your
interactions with the president from
your vantage point
and outlines a strained relationship the
American people need to hear your side
of the story just as they need to hear
the president descriptions of events
these interactions also highlight the
importance of the committee's on going
investigation our experienced staff is
interviewing all relevant parties and
some of the most sensitive intelligence
in our country's possession we will
establish the facts separate from rapid
speculation and lay them out for the
American people to make their own
judgment only then will we as a nation
be able to move forward and to put this
episode to rest
there are several outstanding issues not
addressed in your statement that I hope
you'll clear up for the American people
today did the President's request for
loyalty your impression that they that
the one-on-one dinner of January 27th
was and I quote at least in part an
effort to create some sort of patronage
relationship or is March 30th phone call
asking what you could do to lift the
cloud of Russia investigation in any way
alter your approach or the FBI's
investigation into general Flynn or the
broader investigation into Russia and
possible links to the campaign in your
opinion did potential Russian efforts to
establish length with the individuals in
the Trump orbit rise to the level we
could define as collusion or was it a
counterintelligence concern there's been
a significant public speculation about
your decision-making related to the
Clinton email investigation why did you
decide publicly to publicly announce
FBI's recommendations that the
Department of Justice not pursue
criminal charges you have described it
as a choice between a bad decision and a
worse decision the American people need
to understand the facts behind your
action this committee is uniquely suited
to investigate Russia's interference and
then 2016 elections we also have a
unified bipartisan approach to what is a
highly true
urghhh partisan issue russian activities
during 2016 election may have been aimed
at one party's candidate but as my
colleague senator Rubio says frequently
in 2018 and 2020 it could be aimed at
anyone at home or abroad my colleague
senator Warner and I have worked in it
work to stay in lockstep on this
investigation
we've had our differences on approach at
times but I've constantly stressed that
we need to be a team and I think Senator
Warner agrees with me
we must keep these questions above
politics and partisanship it's too
important to be tainted by anyone trying
to score political points with that
again I welcome you director and I turn
to budge chairman for any comments you
might have well thank you mr. chairman
and let me start by again absolutely
thanking all the members of the
committee for the seriousness in which
they've taken on this task mr. Comey
thank you for agreeing to come testify
as part of this committees investigation
into Russia I realized that this hearing
has been obviously the focus of a lot of
Washington in the last few days but the
truth is many Americans who may be
tuning in today probably haven't focused
on every twist and turn of the
investigation so I'd like to briefly
describe at least from this senator
standpoint what we already know and what
we're still investigating to be clear
this investigation is not about
relitigated the election it's not about
who won or lost and it sure as heck it's
not about democrats versus republicans
we're here because of foreign adversary
attacked us right here at home plain and
simple
not by guns or missiles but by foreign
operatives seeking to hijack our most
important democratic process our
presidential election Russian spies
engaged
in a series of online cyber raids and a
broad campaign of disinformation all
ultimately aimed at sowing chaos to
undermine public faith in our process in
our leadership and ultimately in
ourselves and that's not just this
senator's opinion it is the unanimous
determination of the entire US
intelligence community so we must find
out the full story what the Russians did
and candidly as some other colleagues
have mentioned why they were so
successful and more importantly we must
determine the necessary steps to take to
protect our democracy and ensure they
can't do it again
Charlie mentioned elections in 2018 and
2020 in my home state of Virginia we
have elections this year in 2017 simply
put we cannot let anything or anyone
prevent us from getting to the bottom of
this now mr. Comey let me say at the
outset we haven't always agreed on every
issue in fact I've occasionally
questioned some of the actions you've
taken but I've never had any reason to
question your integrity your expertise
or your intelligence you've been a
straight shooter with this committee and
have been willing to speak truth to
power even at the risk of your own
career which makes the way in which you
are fired by the president ultimately
shocking recall we began this entire
process with the president and his staff
first denying that the Russians were
ever involved and then falsely claiming
that no one from his team was ever in
touch with any Russians we know that's
just not the truth
numerous Trump associates had
undisclosed contacts with Russians
before and after the election including
the president's Attorney General his
former national security adviser and his
current senior adviser mr. Kushner that
doesn't even begin to count the host of
additional campaign associates
advisors who've also been caught up in
this massive web we saw mr. Trump's
campaign manager mr. mana for forced to
step down over ties to Russian back
entities the national security adviser
general Flynn had to resign over his
lies about engagements with the Russians
and we saw the candidate him Spratt
himself express an odd and unexplained
affection for the Russian dictator while
calling for the hacking of his opponent
there's a lot to investigate enough in
fact then director Comey publicly
acknowledged that he was leading an
investigation into those links between
mr. Trump's campaign and the Russian
government as the director of the FBI
mr. Comey was ultimately responsible for
conducting that investigation which
might explain why you're sitting now as
a private citizen what we didn't know
was at the same time that this
investigation was proceeding the
President himself appears to have been
engaged in an effort to influence or at
least co-opt the Director of the FBI the
testimony that mr. Comey is submitted
for today's hearing is very disturbing
for example on January 27th after
summoning director Comey to dinner the
president appears to a threatened
director's job while telling him quote I
need loyalty I expect loyalty at a later
meeting on February 14th the president
asked the Attorney General to leave the
Oval Office so he could privately ask
director Comey again quote to see way
clear to letting Flynn go that is a
statement that director Comey
interpreted as he as a request that he
dropped the investigation connected the
general Flynn's false statements think
about it the president United States
asking the FBI director to drop an
ongoing investigation and after that the
president called the FBI director on two
additional occasions March 30th and
April 11th and asked him again
quote to lift the cloud on the Russian
investigation now director Comey denied
each of these improper requests the
loyalty pledge the admonition to drop
the Flint investigation the request to
lift the cloud on the Russian
investigation of course after his
refusal director Comey was fired the
initial explanation for the firing
didn't pass any smell test
somehow it replicas me was fired because
he didn't treat Hillary Clinton
appropriately of course that explanation
lasted about a day because the President
himself then made very clear that he was
thinking about Russia when he decided to
fire director Comey shockingly reports
suggests that the president admitted as
much in an oval office meeting with the
Russians the day after director Comey
was fired disparaging our country's top
law enforcement official as a
quote/unquote nutjob the president
allegedly suggested that his firing
relieved great pressure on his feelings
about Russia this is not happening in
isolation at the same time the president
was engaged in these efforts with
director Comey he was also at least
allegedly asking senior leaders of the
intelligence community to downplay the
Russian investigation or to intervene
with the director yesterday we had DNI
director Coates an NSA director Admiral
Rogers who were offered a number of
opportunities to flatly deny those press
reports they expressed their opinions
but they did not take that opportunity
to deny those reports they did not take
advantage of that opportunity my belief
that's not how the president United
States should behave regardless of the
outcome of our investigation into the
Russia links director Comey's firing and
his testimony raised separate and
troubling questions that we must get to
the bottom of again as I said at the
outset I've seen
firsthand how seriously every member of
this committee is taking his work I'm
proud of the committee's efforts so far
let me be clear this is not a witch hunt
this is not fake news it is an effort to
protect our country from a new threat if
quite honestly will not go away any time
soon so mr. Comey your testimony here
today will help us move towards that
goal
I look forward to that testimony Thank
You mr. Chari Thank You vice chairman
director as discussed when you agreed to
appear before the committee it would be
under oath I'd ask you to please stand
raise your right hand you solemnly swear
to tell the truth the whole truth and
nothing but the truth so help you God
please be seated director Comey you're
now under oath and I would just note to
members you will be recognized by
seniority for a period up to seven
minutes and again it is the intent to
move to a closed session no later than
1:00 p.m. with that director Comey you
are recognized you have the floor for as
long as you might need Thank You mr.
chairman ranking member Warner members
of the committee thank you for inviting
me here to testify today I've submitted
my statement for the record and I'm not
going to repeat it here this morning I
thought I would just offer some very
brief introductory remarks and then I
would welcome your questions when I was
appointed FBI director in 2013 I
understood that I served at the pleasure
of the president even though I was
appointed to a 10-year term which
Congress created in order to underscore
the importance of the FBI being outside
of politics and independent I understood
that I could be fired by a president for
any reason or for no reason at all
and on May the 9th when I learned that I
had been fired for that reason I
immediately came home as a private
citizen
but then the explanations the shifting
explanations confused me and
increasingly concerned me they confused
me because the
and I had had multiple conversations
about my job both before and after he
took office and he had repeatedly told
me I was doing a great job and he hoped
I would stay and I had repeatedly
assured him that I did intend to stay
and serve out the remaining six years of
my term he told me repeatedly that he
had talked to lots of people about me
including our current Attorney General
and had learned that I was doing a great
job and that I was extremely well-liked
by the FBI workforce so it confused me
when I saw on television the president's
saying that he actually fired me because
of the Russian investigation and learned
again from the media that he was telling
privately other parties that my firing
had relieved great pressure on the
Russia investigation I was also confused
by the initial explanation that was
offered publicly that I was fired
because of the decisions I had made
during the election year that didn't
make sense to me for a whole bunch of
reasons including the time and all the
water that had gone under the bridge
since those hard decisions that had to
be made that didn't make any sense to me
and although the law required no reason
at all to fire an FBI director the
administration then chose to defame me
and more importantly the FBI by saying
that the organization was in disarray
that it was poorly led that the
workforce had lost confidence in its
leader those were lies
plain and simple and I am so sorry that
the FBI workforce had to hear them and
I'm so sorry that the American people
were told them I worked every day at the
FBI to help make that great organization
better and I say help because I did
nothing alone at the FBI there are no
indispensable people at the FBI the
organization's great strength is that
its values and abilities run deep and
wide the FBI will be fine without me
the FBI's mission will be relentlessly
pursued by its people and that mission
is to protect the American people and
uphold the Constitution of the United
States
I will deeply miss being part of that
mission
but this organization and its mission
will go on long beyond me and long
beyond any particular administration I
have a message before I closed for the
my former colleagues of the FBI but at
first I want the American people to know
this truth
the FBI is honest the FBI is strong and
the FBI is and always will be
independent and now to my former
colleagues if I may I am so sorry that I
didn't get the chance to say goodbye to
you properly it was the honor of my life
to serve beside you to be part of the
FBI family and I will miss it for the
rest of my life thank you for standing
watch thank you for doing so much good
for this country do that good as long as
ever you can and senators I look forward
to your questions
director thank you for that testimony
both oral and the written testimony that
you provided to the committee yesterday
and made public to of the American
people chair would recognize himself
first for 12 minutes vice chair for 12
minutes based upon the agreement we have
director did the special counsels office
review and/or edit your written
testimony No
do you have any doubt that Russia
attempted to interfere in the 2016
elections none do you have any doubt
that the Russian government was behind
the intrusions in the DNC and the
d-triple-c systems and the subsequent
leaks of that information no no doubt
you have any doubt that the Russian
government was behind the cyber
intrusion in the state voter files no do
you have any doubt that officials of the
Russian government were fully aware of
these activities no doubt are you
confident that no votes cast in the 2016
presidential election were altered
I'm confident by the time when I left
his director I had seen no indication of
that whatsoever director Comey
did the president at any time ask you to
stop the FBI investigation into Russian
involvement in the 2016 US elections not
to my understanding now did any
individual working for this
administration including the Justice
Department ask you to stop the Russian
investigation no director when the
president requested that you and I quote
let Flynn go general Flynn had an
unreported contact with Russians which
is an offense and if press accounts are
right there might have been
discrepancies between facts and his FBI
testimony in your estimation was general
Flynn at that time in serious legal
jeopardy and in addition to that do you
sense that the president was trying to
obstruct justice or just seek for a way
from Mike Flynn to save face given he
had already been fired the general fund
at that point in time was in legal
jeopardy there was an open FBI criminal
investigation of his statements in
connection with the Russian contacts and
the contacts themselves and so that was
my assessment at the time I don't think
it's for me to say whether the
conversation I have with the president
was an effort to obstruct I took it as a
very disturbing thing very concerning
but that's a conclusion I'm sure the
Special Counsel will work towards to try
and understand what the intention was
there and whether that's an offense
director is it possible that as part of
this FBI investigation the FBI could
find evidence of criminality that is not
tied to to the 2016 elections possible
collusion or coordination with Russians
sure so there could be something that
just fits a criminal aspect to this that
doesn't have anything to do with the
2016 election cycle correct in any
complex investigation when you start
turning over rocks sometimes you find
things that are unrelated to the primary
investigation that are criminal and
director director coming you have been
criticized publicly for the decision to
present your findings on the email
investigation directly to the American
people have you learned anything since
that time that would have changed what
you said or how you chose to inform the
American people honestly no I mean it
caused a whole lot of personal pain for
me but as I look back given what I knew
at the time and even what I've learned
since I think it was the best way to try
and protect the justice institution
including the FBI in the public domain
is this question of the steel dossier a
document that has been around now for
over a year I'm not sure when the FBI
first took possession of it but the
media had it before you had it and we
had it at the time of your departure
from the FBI was the FBI able to confirm
any criminal allegations contained in
the steel document mr. chairman I don't
think that's a question I can answer in
an open setting because it goes into the
details of the investigation director
the term we hear most often is collusion
when people are describing possible
links between Americans and Russian
government entities related to the
interference in our election would you
say that it's normal for foreign
governments to reach out to members of
an incoming administration yes at what
point does the normal contact cross the
line into an attempt to recruit agents
or influence or spies difficult to say
in the abstract it depends upon the
context whether there's an effort to
keep it covert but what the nature of
the requests made of the American by the
foreign government are it's a it's a
judgment call based on a whole lot of
facts at what point would that
recruitment become a counterintelligence
threat to our country
again difficult to answer in the
abstract but when when a foreign power
is using especially coercion or some
sort of pressure to try and co-opt an
American especially a government
official to act on its behalf that's a
serious concern to the FBI and at the
heart of the FBI's counterintelligence
mission so if you've got a thirty six
page document of specific claims that
are out there
the FBI would have to for
counterintelligence reasons try to
verify anything that might be claimed in
there one and probably first and
foremost is the counterintelligence
concerns that we have about blackmail
would that be an accurate statement yes
if the FBI receives a credible
allegation that there is some effort to
coop coerce direct employ covertly an
American on behalf of the foreign power
that's the basis on which a
counterintelligence investigation is
open and when you read the dossier what
was your reaction given that it was 100%
directed at the president-elect not a
question I can answer an open setting
mr. chairman okay when did you become
aware of the cyber intrusion
the first cyber antis all kinds of cyber
intrusions going on all the time the
first Russia connected cyber intrusion I
became aware of in the late summer of
2015 and in that timeframe there were
more than the DNC and the d-triple-c
that were targets correct there was a
massive effort to target government and
non-governmental near governmental agent
agencies like nonprofits what would be
the estimate of how many entities out
there the Russians specifically targeted
it in that timeframe it's hundreds I
suppose it could be more than a thousand
but it's at least hundreds when did you
become aware that data had been
exfiltrated I'm not sure exactly I think
either in late 15 or early 16 and did
you the director of the FBI have
conversations with the last
administration about the risk that this
posed yes and share with us if you will
what actions they took well the FBI had
already undertaken an effort to notify
all the victims and that's what we
consider the entities that were attacked
as part of this massive spear phishing
campaign and so we notified them in an
effort to disrupt what might be ongoing
and then there was a series of
continuing interactions with entities
through the rest of 15 into 16 and then
throughout 16 the administration was
trying to decide how to respond to the
intrusion activity that it saw and the
FBI in this case unlike other cases that
you might investigate did you ever have
access to the actual hardware that was
hacked or did you have to rely on a
third party to provide you the data that
they had collected in the case of the
DNC and I believe the d-triple-c but I'm
sure the DNC we did not have access to
the devices themselves
we got relevant forensic information
from a private party a high-class entity
that had done the work but we didn't get
direct access but no content correct
hidden content an important part of the
forensics from a counterintelligence
standpoint it is although what was
briefed to me by my folks the people who
were my folks at the time is that they
had gotten the information from the
private party that they needed to
understand the intrusion by the spring
of 2016
let me go back if I can very briefly to
the decision to publicly go out with
your results on the email was your
decision influenced by the Attorney
General's tarmac meeting with the former
President Bill Clinton yes in in a
ultimately conclusive way that was the
thing that kept it from me that I had to
do something separately to protect the
credibility of the investigation which
meant both the FBI and the Justice
Department were there are other things
that
tributed to that that you can describe
in an open session there were other
things that contributed to that but one
significant item I can't I know the
committee's been briefed on there's been
some public accounts of it which are
nonsense but I understand the committee
has been briefed on the classified facts
probably the only other consideration I
guess I can talk of an open setting is
that at one point the Attorney General
had directed me not to call it an
investigation but instead to call it a
matter which confused me and concerned
me but that was one of the bricks in the
load that led me to conclude I have to
step away from the department if we're
to close this case credibly director of
my last question you're not only a
seasoned prosecutor you've lived the FBI
for years you understand the
investigative process you've worked with
this committee closely and we're
grateful to you because I think we've
we've mutually built trust in what your
organization does and and what we do is
there any doubt in your mind that this
committee can carry out its oversight
role in the 2016 Russian involvement in
the elections in parallel with the now
special council that's been set up
no no doubt it can be done it requires
lots of conversations but Bob Muller is
one of this country's great great pros
and I'm sure you all will be able to
work it out with him to run it in
parallel I want to thank you once again
I want to turn to the vice chairman
Thank You mr. chairman and again
director Comey thank you for your
service and your comments to your FBI
family I know we're heartfelt know that
even though there are some in the
administration who tried to smear your
reputation you had acting director
McCabe in public testimony a few weeks
back and in public testimony yesterday
reaffirm that the vast majority FBI
community had great trust in your
leadership and obviously trusting your
integrity
I want to go through a number of the
meetings that you referenced in your
testimony and let's start with the
January sixth meeting in Trump Tower
where you went up with a series of
officials to brief the president-elect
on the Russia investigation my
understanding is you remained afterwards
to brief him on again quote some
personally sensitive aspects of the
information you relate now you said
after that briefing you felt compelled
to document that conversation that you
actually started documenting as soon as
you got into the car now you've had
extensive experience at the Department
of Justice and if the FBI you've worked
on the presidents of both parties what
was it about that meeting that led you
to determine that you needed to start
putting down a written record a
combination of things I think the
circumstances the subject matter and the
person I was interacting with
circumstances first I was alone with the
President of the United States or the
president-elect soon to be President the
subject matter I was talking about
matters that touch on the FBI's core
responsibilities and that relate to the
president president-elect personally and
then the nature of the person I was
honestly concerned that he might lie
about the nature of our meeting and so I
thought it really important to document
that combination of things I'd never
experienced before but it led me to
believe I got to write it down and it
got to write it down in a very detailed
way I think that's a very important
statement you just made and my
understanding is that then again unlike
your dealings with presidents of either
parties in your past experience in every
subsequent meeting or conversation this
president you created a written record
did you feel that you needed to create
this written record of these memos
because they might need to be relied on
at some future date sure I created
records after conversations and I think
I did it after each of our nine
conversations if I didn't I did it for
nearly all of them especially the ones
that were substantive I knew that there
might come a day when I would need a
record of what had happened
not just to defend myself but to defend
the FBI and and our integrity as an
institution and the independence of our
investigative function that's what made
this so so difficult is it was a
combination of circumstances subject
matter and the particular person and so
in all your experience this was the only
president that you felt like in every
meeting you needed a document because at
some point using your words he might put
out a non truthful representation of
that meeting now right Center and I as I
said my written testimony as FBI
director I interacted with President
Obama I spoke only twice in three years
and didn't document it when I was deputy
attorney general I had one one-on-one
meeting with President Bush about a very
important and difficult national
security matter I didn't write a memo
documenting that conversation either
send a quick email to my staff to let
them know there was something going on
but I didn't feel with President Bush
the need to document it in that way
again because the combination of those
factors just wasn't present with either
President Bush or President Obama I
think that is very significant I think
others will probably question that in
art the Chairman and I have requested
those metals it is our hope that the FBI
will get this committee access to those
memos so that again we can read that
contemporaneous rendition so that we've
got your side of the story now I know
members have said and pressive said that
if you were a great deal has been made
of whether the present you are asked in
effect indicate whether the president
was the subject of any investigation and
my understanding is prior to your
meeting on January 6th you discussed
with your leadership team whether or not
you should be prepared to assure then
president-elect Trump that the FBI was
not investigating him personally now my
shiny's your leadership team agreed with
that but was that a unanimous decision
was there any debate about that wasn't
unanimous one of the members of
leadership team had a view that although
it was technically true we did not have
a counterintelligence file case open on
then president-elect Trump his concern
was because we're looking at the
potential again that's the subject of
investigation coordination between the
campaign and Russia because it was
president Trump present like Trump's
campaign this person's view was
inevitably his behavior his conduct will
fall within the scope of that work and
so he was reluctant to make the
statement that I made I disagreed I
thought it was fair to say what was
literally true there is not a
counterintelligence investigation of mr.
Trump and I decided in the moment to say
it given the nature of our conversation
at that moment in time did you ever
revisit that as in in these subsequent
sessions with the FBI leadership team
sure and and the the leader had that
view it didn't change his view was still
that it was probably although literally
true his concern was it could be
misleading because the nature of the
investigation was such that it might
well touch obviously it would touch the
campaign and the person the head of the
campaign would be the candidate and so
that was his view throughout let me move
to the January 27th dinner where you
said quote the president began by asking
me whether I wanted to stay on as FBI
director he also indicated that lots of
people again your words wanted the job
you go on to say that the dinner itself
was seemingly an effort to quote have
you asked him for your job and creates
some sort of quote unquote patronage
relationship
the president's seems from my reading of
your memo to be holding your job or your
possibility of continuing in your job
over your head in a fairly direct way
what was your impression and what did
you mean by this notion of a patronage
relationship well my impression and
again it's my impression I could always
be wrong but my common sense told me
that what was going on is either he had
concluded or someone had told him that
you didn't you've already asked Comey to
stay and you didn't get anything for it
and that the dinner was an effort to
build a relationship in fact yes
specifically
loyalty in the context of asking me to
stay as I said what was odd about that
is we already talked twice about it by
that point and he'd said I very much
hope you'll stay I hope you'll stay in
fact I just remembered sitting here a
third one when you've seen the picture
of me walking across the Blue Room and
what the president whispered in my ear
was I really look forward to working
with you so after those encounters and
that was just a few days before you yeah
that was on the twenty the Sunday after
the inauguration the next Friday I have
dinner and the president begins by
wanting to talk about my job and so I'm
sitting there thinking wait a minute
three times we've already you've already
asked me to stay or talked about me
staying my common sense again I could be
wrong but my common sense told me what's
going on here is there he's looking to
get something in exchange for granting
my request to stay in the job again we
all understand I was the governor had
people work for me but this constant
requests then again quoting you him
saying that he despite you explaining
your independence he kept coming back to
I need loyalty I expect loyalty had you
ever had any of those kind of requests
before from anyone else you'd work for
in the government no and what made me
uneasy was I'm at that point the
director of the FBI the reason that
Congress created a ten-year term is so
that the director is not feeling as if
they're serving at with political
loyalty owed to any particular person
the the statue of justice has a
blindfold on because you're not supposed
to be peeking out to see whether your
patron is pleased or not with what
you're doing it should be about the
facts and the law that's why I was
that's why I became FBI director to be
in that kind of position so that's why I
was so uneasy well let me let me move on
my time for running out February 14th
again it seems a bit strange you were in
a meeting and your direct superior the
Attorney General was in that meeting as
well yet the president asked everyone to
leave including the Attorney General to
leave before he brought up the matter of
general Flynn what was your impression
of that type of action had you ever seen
anything like that before no
my impression was something big is about
to happen I need to remember every
single word that is spoken and again I
could be wrong I'm 56 years old I've
been seeing a few things my sense was
the Attorney General knew he shouldn't
be leaving which is why he was lingering
and I don't know mr. Kushner well but I
think he picked up on the same thing and
so I knew something was about to happen
that I needed to pay very close
attention to and I found it very
interesting that in the memo that you
wrote after this February 14th pull
aside you made clear that you wrote that
memo in a way that was unclassified if
you affirmative Lee made the decision to
write a memo that was unclassified was
that because you felt at some point the
facts of that meeting would have to come
clean and come clear and actually be
able to be cleared in a way that could
be shared with the American people
well I remember thinking this is a very
disturbing development really important
to our work I need to document it and
preserve it in a way and this committee
gets this but sometimes when things are
classified it tangles them up it's hard
even to share it with an investigative
team it's you have to be very careful
about a handle it for good reason so my
thinking was if I write it in such a way
that I don't include anything that would
trigger a classification that'll make it
easier for us to discuss within the FBI
and the government and to hold on to it
in a way that makes it accessible to us
but again it's our hope particularly
since you pretty knowledgeable guy and
you wrote this in a way that was
unclassified that this committee will
get access to that unclassified document
I think would be very important to our
investigation let me just ask this in
closing how many ongoing investigations
at any time does the FBI have tens of
thousands of thousands did the president
ever ask about any other invested
ongoing investigation no
ever asked about you trying to interfere
on any other investigation no I think
again this speaks volumes this doesn't
even get to the questions around the
phone calls about lifting the cloud I
know other members will get to that but
I really appreciate your testimony and
appreciate your service to our nation
Thank You senator Morra you know I just
I'm sitting here going through my
contacts of them I had one conversation
with the president that was classified
where he asked about our and ongoing
intelligence investigation it was brief
and entirely professional but he didn't
ask you to take any specific action
unlike what he had done visa vie mr.
Flynn and the overall Russian
investigation erect thank you sir
senator rush thank you very much mr.
Comey thank you for your service
America needs more like you and we
really appreciate it
yesterday I got and everybody got the
seven pages of your direct testimony
that's now part of the record here and
the first I read it then I read it again
and all I could think was number one how
much I hated the class of legal writing
when I was in law school and you were
the guy that probably got the a after
after reading this so I find it clear I
find it concise and having been a
prosecutor for number of years and
handling hundreds maybe thousands of
cases and read police reports
investigative reports this is as good as
it gets and and I really appreciate that
not only not only the conciseness and
the clearness of it but also the fact
that you have things that were written
down contemporaneously when they
happened and you actually put them in
quotes
so we know exactly what happened and
we're not getting some rendition of it
that that's in your mind so thank your
to be complemented by great parents and
great teachers who beat that into me
that's obvious sir um the chairman
walked you through a number of things
that the American people need to know
and want to know number one obviously
we're all know about the active measures
that the Russians have taken I think a
lot of people were surprised at this
those of us that work in the
intelligence
he didn't it didn't come as a surprise
but now the American people know this
and it's good they know this because
this is serious and it's a problem I
think secondly I gather from all this
that you're willing to say now that
while you were director the president
United States was not under
investigation is that a fair statement
that's correct
all right so that's a fact that we can
rely on it yes sir okay I remember you
you talked with us shortly after
February 14th when the New York Times
wrote an article that suggested that the
Trump campaign was colluding with the
Russians you remember reading that
article when it first came out I do it
was about allegedly extensive electronic
surveillance the correct communications
yes and and that up should set you to
the point where you actually went out
and surveyed the intelligence community
to see whether whether you were missing
something than that is that correct
that's correct I want to be careful and
openside on I'm not going to go any
further than they've ended so thank you
in addition to that after that you
sought out both Republican and Democrat
senators to tell them that hey I don't
know where this is coming from but this
is not the cave the this is not factual
that you recall that yes okay so so
again so the American people can
understand this that report by the New
York Times was not true is that a fair
statement yeah in the main it was not
true would and again all of you know
this maybe the American people don't the
challenge that I'm not picking on
reporters about writing stories about
classified information is the people
talking about it often don't really know
what's going on and those of us who
actually know what's going on are not
talking about it and we don't call the
press to say hey you got that thing
wrong about this sensitive topic we just
have to leave it there I mentioned the
chairman the nonsense around what
influenced me to make the July fifth
statement nonsense but I can't go
explaining how it's nonsense thank you
all right so so those three things we
now know regarding the active measures
were the presence under investigation
and the collusion between the Russian
the Trump campaign in the
I want a drill write down as my time is
limited to the most recent dust-up
regarding allegations of the President
and states obstructed justice and boy
you nailed this down on page five
paragraph three you put this in quotes
words matter you wrote down the words so
we can all have the words in front of us
now there's 28 words there that are in
quotes and it says quote I hope this is
the president speaking I hope you can
see your way clear to letting this go to
letting Flynn go he is a good guy I hope
you can let this go now those are his
exact words is that correct correct and
you wrote them here and you put them in
quotes correct okay um thank you for
that he did not direct you to let it go
not in his words no he did not order you
to let it go again those words are not
in order no he said I hope now like me
you probably did hundreds of cases maybe
thousands of cases charging people with
criminal offenses and of course you have
knowledge of the thousands of cases out
there that where people have been
charged do you know of any case where a
person has been charged for obstruction
of justice or for that matter any other
criminal offense where this they said or
thought they hoped for an outcome
I don't know well enough to answer and
the reason I keep saying his words is I
took it as a direction right I mean it's
the president United States with me
alone saying I hope this I took it as
this is what he wants me to do no I
didn't I didn't obey that but that's the
way I took it you may have taken it as a
direction but that's not what he said
correct I said he said I hope those are
exact words correct yeah you don't know
of anyone that's ever been charged for
hoping something is that a fair
statement I don't as I sit here yeah
thank you thank you mister senator
Feinstein thanks very much of mr.
chairman mr. Comey I just want you to
know that I have great respect for you
Senator Cornyn and I sit on the
Judiciary Committee so we have occasion
to have you before us and I know that
you're a man of strength and integrity
and I really regret the situation that
we all find ourselves in I just want to
say that let me begin with one
overarching question why do you believe
you were fired guess I don't know for
sure
I believe the prank the president had
his word that I was fired because of the
Russia investigation something about the
way I was conducting it the president
felt created pressure on him they want
to relieve again I didn't know that at
the time but I've watched his interview
I've read the press accounts of his
conversations so I take him at his word
there now look I could be wrong maybe
he's saying something that's not true
but I take him at his word at least
based on what I know now yeah I talk for
a moment about his request that you
pledge loyalty and your response to that
and what impact you believe that had I I
don't know for sure because I don't know
the president well enough to read him
well I think it was cuz our relationship
didn't get off to a great start giving
the conversation I had to have on
January 6th this was not this didn't
improve the relationship because it was
very very awkward he was asking for
something and I was refusing to give it
but again I don't know him well enough
to know how he reacted to that exactly
do you believe the Russia investigation
played a role and why I was fired yes
yes because I've seen the president say
so let's let's go to the Flynn issue um
senator riche outlined I hope you could
see your way to letting Flynn go he's a
good guy I hope you can let this go but
you also said in your written remarks
and I quote that you had understood the
president to be requesting that we drop
any investigation of Flynn in connection
with false statements about
his conversations with the Russian
ambassador in December and quote please
go into that with more detail well the
context and the president's words are
what led me to that conclusion as I said
in my statement I could be wrong but
Flynn had been forced to resign that day
before and and the controversy around
general Flynn at that point time was
centered on whether he had lied to the
vice president about the nature of his
conversations with the Russians whether
he had been candid with others in the
course of that and so that happens on
the day before on the 14th the president
makes specific reference to that and so
that's why I understood him to be saying
that what he wanted me to do was drop
any investigation connected to Flynn's
account of his conversations with the
Russians now here's the question you're
big you're strong I know the Oval Office
and I know what happens to people when
they walk in there is a certain amount
of intimidation but why didn't you stop
and say mr. president this is wrong I
cannot discuss this with you it's a
great question
maybe if I were stronger I would have I
was so stunned by the conversation that
I just took it in and the only thing I
could think to say because I was playing
in my mind cuz I remember every word he
said I was playing in my mind what
should my response be and that's why I
very carefully chose the words and look
like I've seen the tweet about tapes
lordy I hope their tapes I I remember
saying I agree he's a good guy as a way
of saying I'm not agreeing with what you
just asked me to do again maybe other
people would be stronger in that
circumstance but that that was a that's
how I conducted myself I hope I'll never
have another opportunity maybe if I did
it again I would do it better you
described two phone calls that you
received from President Trump one on
March 30 and one on April 11 where he
quote described the Russia investigation
as a cloud that was impairing his
ability and
as president and asked you quote to lift
the cloud end quote
what how did you interpret that and what
did you believe he wanted you to do I
interpreted that as he was frustrated
that the Russia investigation was taking
up so much time and energy I think he
meant of the executive branch but in the
in the public square in general and it
was making it difficult for him to focus
on other priorities of his but what he
asked me was actually narrower than that
so I think what he meant by the cloud
and again I could be wrong but what I
think he meant by the cloud was the
entire investigation is is taking up
oxygen and making it hard for me to
focus on the things I want to focus on
the ask was to get it out that I the
president of not personally under
investigation after April 11th did he
ask you more ever about the Russia
investigation did he ask you any
questions we ever spoke again after
April 11th you told the president ice I
would see what we could do what did you
mean it was kind of a slightly cowardly
way of trying to avoid telling him we're
not going to do that that I would see
what we could do was a way of kind of
getting off the phone frankly and then I
turned and handed it to the Acting
Deputy Attorney General mr. Bente so did
I wanted to go into that who did you
talk with about that lifting the clouds
stopping the investigation back at the
FBI and what was their response
well the FBI during one of the two
conversations I'm not remembering
exactly I think the first my chief of
staff was actually sitting in front of
me and heard my end of the conversation
because the president's call was a
surprise and I discussed the lifting the
cloud in the request with the senior
leadership team who in typically and I
think in all these circumstances was the
deputy director my chief of staff the
general counsel the
the deputy directors chief counsel and I
think in a number of circumstances the
number three in the FBI and a few of the
conversations included the head of the
national security branch so that group
of us that lead the FBI when it comes to
national security okay you have the
President of the United States asking
you to stop an investigation that's an
important investigation what was the
response of your colleagues I think they
were as shocked and troubled by it as I
was some said things that led me to
believe that I don't remember exactly
but the reaction was similar to mine
they're all experienced people who had
never experienced such a thing so they
were very concerned and then the
conversation turned to about so what
should we do with this information and
that was a struggle for us because we
are the leaders of the FBI so it's been
reported to us in that I heard it and
now I've shared it with the leaders of
the FBI our conversation was should we
share this with any senior officials at
the Justice Department our absolute
primary concern was we can't infect the
investigative team we don't want the
agents and analysts working on this to
know the president United States as as
asked and when it comes to the president
I took it as a direction to get rid of
this investigation because we're not
going to follow that that request and so
we decided we got to keep it away from
our troops but is there anybody else we
ought to tell the Justice Department and
as I laid out in my in my statement we
considered whether to tell the Attorney
General decided that didn't make sense
because we believed rightly that he was
shortly going to recuse there were no
other Senate confirmed leaders in the
Justice Department at that point the
Deputy Attorney General was mr. Bente
who was acting going to be shortly in
that seat and we decided the best move
would be to hold it keep it in a box
documented as we had already done and
then this investigation is going to go
on figure out what to do with it down
the road is there a way to corroborate
this our view at the time was look it's
your word against the president's
there's no way to corroborate this that
my view of that changed when the
prospect of tapes was raised but that's
how we thought about it then thank you
thank you sir senator Rubio
Thank You director call me the meeting
in the Oval Office where he made the
request about Mike Flynn was that the
only time he asked you to hopefully let
it go
yes and in that meeting as you
understood it that was he was asking not
about the general Russian investigation
he was asking very specifically about
the Jeopardy that Flynn was in himself
that's how I understood yes sir and as
you perceived it while it was a request
that he hoped you did away with it you
perceived it as an order given his
position to setting and the like in the
some of the circumstances yes at the
time did you say anything to the
president about that is not an
appropriate request or did you tell the
White House Counsel that is not an
appropriate request someone needs to go
tell the president that he can't do
these things I didn't know okay why I
don't know I think the sir as I said
earlier think the circumstances were
such that it was I was a bit stunned and
didn't have the presence of mind and I
don't know why you know I don't want to
make you sound like I'm captain
courageous I don't know whether unified
the presence of mine I would have said
to the president sir that's wrong I
don't know whether I would have but in
the moment it didn't it didn't come to
my mind what came to my mind is be
careful what you say and so I said I
agree Flynn is a good guy so on the
cloud we keep talking about this cloud
you perceived the cloud to be the
Russian investigation in general yes sir
but this specific ask was that you would
tell the American people what you had
already told him what you had already
told the leaders of Congress both
Democrats and Republicans that he was
not personally under investigation yes
sir
that I was asking you to do what you
have done here today correct yes sir
okay and again at that setting did you
say to the president that it would be
inappropriate for you to do so and then
talk to the White House Counsel or
anybody so hopefully they would talk to
him and tell him that he couldn't do
this first time I said I'll see what we
can do second time I explained how it
should work that the White House Counsel
should contact the Deputy Attorney
General you told the president said okay
I think that's what I'll do and just to
be clear for you to make a public
statement that he was not under
investigation would not have been
illegal but you felt it made no sense
because it could potentially create a
duty to correct if circumstance has
changed yes sir we wrestled with it
before my testimony where I confirmed
that there
as an investigation and there were two
primary concerns one was it creates a
duty to correct which I've lived before
and you want to be very careful about
doing that and second it's a slippery
slope because if we say the President
and the Vice President aren't under
investigation what's the principal basis
for stopping and so the leadership at
justice acting Attorney General Ben Tay
said you're not going to do that now on
March 30th during the phone call about
the general Flynn you said he abruptly
shifted and brought up something that
you call quote unquote than the cabe
thing specifically the McCabe thing as
you understood it was that McCabe's wife
had received campaign money from what I
assume means Terry McAuliffe yes sir
that was very close to the Clintons and
and so why did you had the president any
point in time expressed to you concerned
opposition potential opposition to
McCabe I don't like this guy because he
got money from someone that's close to
Clinton he had asked me during previous
conversations about Andy McCabe and said
you know essence how's he gonna be with
me as president I was pretty rough on
him on the campaign trail he was rough
on McCabe he was roughed by his own
account he said he was rough on McCabe
and mrs. McCabe on the campaign trail
how's he going to be and I assured the
president Andy is a total Pro the no
issue at all you got to know the people
the FBI they are not so that so the
president turns to you and says remember
I never brought up the McCabe thing
because you said he was a good guy did
you perceive that to be a statement that
I took care of you
I didn't do something because you told
me he was a good guy so now you know I'm
asking you potentially for something in
return is that how you perceived it I
wasn't sure what to make of it honestly
that's possible but it it was so out of
context that I didn't have a clear view
of what it was now on a number of
occasions here you bring up let's
talking now about the general Russian
investigation okay and page six of your
testimony you say the first thing you
say is he asked what we could do to
quote-unquote lift the cloud the general
Russian investigation and you responded
that we were investigating the matter as
quickly as we could and that there would
be great benefit if we didn't find
anything to having done the work well
and he agreed he reinforces the problems
it was causing him
he agreed so in essence the president
agreed with your statement that it would
be great if we could have a
investigation all the facts came out and
we found nothing so he agreed that that
would be ideal but this cloud is still
messing up my ability to do the rest of
my agenda is that an accurate assessment
yes sir he actually went farther than
that he said and if some of my
satellites did something wrong would be
good to find that out well that's the
second part and that is the satellites
he said it's one of my satellites I
imagine by that he met some of the other
people surrounding his campaign did
something wrong it would be great to
know that as well yes sir that's what he
said so are those the other are those
deal only two instances in which that
sort of back-and-forth happened where
the president was basically saying and
I'm paraphrasing here it's okay do the
Russian investigation I hope it all
comes out I have nothing to do with
anything Russia it'd be great if it all
came out if people around me were doing
things that were wrong yes as I recorded
it accurately there that was a sentiment
he was expressing so what it bears it
comes down to is the president has asked
three things of you he asked for your
loyalty and you said you would be
loyally honest honestly loyal honestly
loyal the the he asked you on one
occasion to let the Mike Flint thing go
because he was a good guy by the way
you're aware that he said the exact same
thing in the press the next day he's a
good guy he's been treated unfairly etc
etc so I imagine your FBI agents read
that I'm sure they did your breath the
president's wishes were known to them
certainly by the next day when he had a
press conference with a prime minister
going back the three requests were
number one
be loyal number two um let the Mike
Flynn thing go he's a good guy he's been
treated unfairly and number three can
you please tell the American people what
these leaders in Congress already know
what you already know you told me three
times that I'm not under personally
under investigation those are the three
things he asked yes sir you know this
investigation is full of leaks left and
right I mean we've learned more from the
newspapers sometimes than we do from our
open hearings for sure you ever wonder
why of all the things in this
investigation the only thing that's
never been leaked is the fact that the
president was not personally under
investigation despite the fact that both
Democrats and Republicans and the
leadership of Congress knew that and
have known that for weeks I don't know I
find matters that are briefed to the
gang
eight are pretty tightly held in my
experience finally who are those senior
leaders at the FBI that you shared these
conversations with as I said in response
to senator Feinstein's question of
deputy director my chief of staff
general counsel the deputy directors
chief counsel and then more often than
not the number three person at the FBI
who is the associate deputy director and
then quite often the head of the
national security branch Center what
Thank You mr. chairman mr. call me
welcome you and I have had significant
policy differences over the years
particularly protecting Americans access
to secure encryption but I believe the
timing of your firing stinks and
yesterday you put on the record
testimony that demonstrates why the odor
of presidential abuse of power is so
strong now to my questions in talking to
Senator Warner about this dinner that
you had with the president I believe
January 27th all in one dinner the
president raised your job prospects he
asked for your loyalty and denied
allegations against him all took place
over one supper now you told senator
Warner that the president was looking to
quote get something looking back did
that dinner suggest that your job might
be contingent on how you handled the
investigation I don't know that I'd go
that far I got the sense my job would be
contingent upon how he felt I excuse me
how he felt I conducted myself and
whether I demonstrated loyalty but I
don't know what I go so far as to
connect it to the investor the president
was trying to create some sort of
patronage relationship in a patronage
relationship isn't the underling
expected to behave in a manner
consistent
with the wishes of the boss yes or at
least consider how what you're doing
will affect the boss as a significant
consideration let me turn to the
Attorney General in your statement you
said that you and the FBI leadership
team decided not to discuss the
president's actions with attorney
general sessions even though he had not
recused himself what was it about the
Attorney General's own interactions with
the Russians or his behavior with regard
to the investigation that would have led
the entire leadership of the FBI to make
this decision our judgment as I recall
was that he was very close to and
inevitably going to recuse himself for a
variety of reasons we also were aware of
facts that I can't discuss in an open
setting that would make his continued
engagement in a Russia related
investigation problematic and so we were
we were convinced in fact I think we'd
already heard that the career people
were recommending that he recused
himself that he was not going to be in
contact with Russia related matters much
longer and that turned out to be the
case how would you characterize Attorney
General Sessions adherence to his
recusal in particular with regard to his
involvement in your firing which the
president has acknowledged was because
of the Russian investigation that's a
question I can't answer I think it's a
reasonable question if as the president
said I was fired because of the Russian
investigation
why was the Attorney General involved in
that chain I don't know and so I don't
have an answer for the question
your testimony was that the president's
request about Flynn could infect the
investigation had the president got what
he wanted and what he asked of you
what would have been the effect on the
investigation but we would have closed
any investigation of general Flynn in
connection with
his statements and encounter statements
about and encounters with Russians in
the late part of December so we would
have dropped an open criminal
investigation
so in effect when you talk about
infecting the enterprise you would have
dropped something major that would have
spoken to the overall ability of the
American people to get the facts correct
and and as good as our people are our
judgment was we don't want them hearing
that the president United States wants
this to go away because it might have an
effect on their ability to be fair and
impartial and aggressive now the acting
Attorney General Yates
found out that Michael Flynn could be
blackmailed by the Russians and she went
immediately to warn the White House
Flynn is gone but other individuals with
contacts with the Russians are still in
extremely important positions of power
should the American people have the same
sense of urgency now with respect to
them Nicole I can say senator is it's a
the special counsels investigation is
very important to understanding what
efforts there were or are by the Russian
government to influence our government
is a critical part of the FBI's mission
so and you've got the right person in
Bob Muller to lead it so it's a very
important piece of work vice president
Pence was the head of the transition
tier knowledge was he aware of the
concerns about Michael Flynn prior to
ordering general Flynn's tenure as
national security adviser
I don't you're asking including up to
the time when Flynn was forced to resign
my understanding is that he was and I'm
trying to where where I get that
understanding from I think from acting
Attorney General Yates so former acting
Attorney General Yates testified that
concerns about general Flynn were
discussed with
intelligence community would that have
included anyone at the CIA or dan coates
--is office the DNI I would assume yes
Michael Flynn resigned four days after
Attorney General Sessions was sworn in
do you know if the Attorney General was
aware of the concerns about Michael
Flynn during that period I don't as I
sit here I don't I don't recall that he
was i I could be wrong but I don't
remember that he was and finally let's
see if you can give us some sense of who
recommended your firing
besides the letters from the Attorney
General the Deputy Attorney General do
you have any information on who may have
recommended or have been involved in
your firing I don't I don't
okay Thank You mr. chairman senator
Collins Thank You mr. chairman
mr. Comey let me begin by thanking you
for your voluntary compliance with our
request to appear before this committee
and assist us and that's very important
investigation I want first to ask you
about your conversations with the
president the three conversations in
which you told him that he was not under
investigation
the first was during your January 6th
meeting according to your testimony in
which it appears that you actually
volunteered that assurance is that
correct that's correct
did you limit that statement to
counterintelligence investigation sir
were you talking about any kind of FBI
investigation I didn't I didn't use the
term counterintelligence I was speaking
to him and briefing him about some
salacious and unverified material it was
in the context of that that he had a
strong and defensive reaction about that
not being
true and my reading of it was it was
important for me to assure him we were
not personally investigating him and so
the context then was actually narrower
focused on what I just talked to him
about though it was very important
because it was first true and second I
was very very much about being in kind
of a kind of a J Edgar Hoover type
situation I didn't want him thinking
that I was briefing him on this to sort
of hang it over him in some way I was
briefing him on it because we had been
told by the media it was about to launch
we don't want to be keeping that from
him and if there was something he needed
to know this was being said but I was
very keen not to leave him with an
impression that the bureau was trying to
do something to him and so that's the
context in which I said sir we're not
personally investigating you and then on
and that's why you volunteered the
information yes ma'am Rhett Bennett on
the January 27th dinner you show you
told the president that he should be
careful about asking you to investigate
because quote you might create a
narrative that we are investigating him
personally which we weren't again were
you limiting that statement to
counterintelligence investigations or
more broadly such as a criminal
investigation the context was very
similar I didn't I didn't modify the
word investigation it was again he was
reacting strongly against that
unverified material saying I'm tempted
to order you to investigate it and that
in the context of that I said sir you
want to be careful about that because it
might create a narrative we're
investigating you personally and then
there was the March 30th phone column
with the president in which you reminded
him that congressional leaders have been
briefed that we were not personally the
FBI was not personally investigating
president Trump and again was that
statement to congressional leaders and
to the president limited to counter
intelligence investigations or was that
a broader statement I'm trying to
understand whether there was any kind of
investigation of the president
under way no I'm sorry if I
misunderstood I apologize we briefed the
congressional leadership about what
Americans we had opened
counterintelligence investigation cases
on and we specifically said the
president is not one of those Americans
but that there was no other
investigation of the president that we
were not mentioning at that time what
the context was counterintelligence but
I wasn't trying to hide some criminal
investigation of the President and was
the president under investigation at the
time of your dismissal on May 9th no I'd
like to now turn to the conversations
with the president about Michael Flynn
which had been discussed at great length
and in first let me make very clear that
the president never should have cleared
the room and he never should have asked
you as you reported to let it go to let
the investigation go but I remain
puzzled by your response your response
was I agree that Mykel plan is a good
guy you could have said mr. president
this meeting is inappropriate this
response could compromise the
investigation you should not be making
such a request it's fundamental to the
operation of our government that the FBI
be insulated from this kind of political
pressure and you've talked to bed today
about that you were stunned by the
president making the request but my
question to you is later on upon
reflection did you go to anyone at the
Department of Justice and ask them to
call the White House counsel's office
and explain that the president had to
have a far better understanding and
appreciation of his role visa be the FBI
in general I did I spoke to the Attorney
General and I spoke to the
Deputy Attorney General mr. Rosen Stein
when he took office and explained my
serious concern about the way in which
the president is interacting especially
with the FBI and I specifically as I
said in my testimony I asked the told
the Attorney General it can't happen
that you get kicked out of the room and
the president talks to me but look in
the room and and but why didn't we raise
the specific it was of investigative
interest to us to try and figure out so
what just happened with the President's
request so I would not have want to
alert the White House that it had
happened until we figured out what are
we going to do with this investigative
Lee your testimony was that you went to
attorney general sessions and said don't
ever leave me alone with him again
are you saying that you also told him
that he had made a request that you let
it go with regard to part of the
investigation of Michael Flynn no I
specifically did not I did not you
mentioned that from your very first
meeting with the president you decided
to write a memo memorializing the
conversation what was it about that very
first meeting that made you write a memo
when you not done that with two previous
presidents as I said a combination of
things a gut feeling is important
overlay on the but the circumstances
that I was alone the subject matter and
the nature of the person that I was
interacting with in my read of that
person and yeah and and and really just
a gut feel laying on top of all of that
that this it's going to be important to
protect this organization that I make
records of this and finally did you show
copies of your memos to anyone outside
of the Department of Justice yes
and to whom did you show copies I asked
a president tweeted on Friday after I
got fired that I better hope there's not
tapes I woke up in the middle of the
night on Monday night because it didn't
dawn on me originally
that there might be corroboration for
our conversation there might be a tape
and my judgment was I needed to get that
out into the public square and so I
asked a friend of mine to share the
content of the memo with a reporter
didn't do it myself for a variety of
reasons but I asked him to because I
thought that might prompt the
appointment of a special counsel and so
I asked a close friend of mine to do it
and was said mr. Widders
no no who was that a good friend of mine
who's a professor of Columbia Law School
Thank You senator Heinrich mr. Comey uh
prior to January 27th of this year have
you ever had a one-on-one meeting or or
a private dinner with a President of the
United States no I met dinner no I had
two one-on-ones with President Obama
that I laid out in my testimony wants to
talk about law enforcement issues law
enforcement and race which was an
important topic throughout for me and
for the president and then once very
briefly for him to say goodbye were
those brief interactions no the one
about law enforcement and race and
policing we spoke for probably over an
hour just the two of us how unusual is
it to have a one-on-one dinner with the
President did that strike you as odd
yeah so much so that I assumed there
would be others that he couldn't
possibly be having dinner with me alone
if do you have a impression that if you
had found if you would behave
differently in that dinner and I am
quite pleased that you did not but if
you had found a way to express some sort
of expression of loyalty or given some
suggestion that the Flyn criminal
investigation might be pursued less
vigorously do you think you would have
still been fired I don't know I get it's
impossible to say looking back I don't
know but you felt like those two things
were were directly relevant to your
the kind of relationship that the
president was seeking to establish with
you sure yes the president has
repeatedly talked about the Russian
investigation into the u.s. or the
Russian Russia's involvement in the u.s.
election cycle as a hoax and as fake
news can you talk a little bit about
what you saw as FBI director and
obviously only the parts that you could
share in this setting that that
demonstrate how serious this action
actually was and why there was an
investigation in the first place yes sir
the there should be no fuzz on this
whatsoever
the Russians interfered in our election
during the 2016 cycle they did it with
purpose they did it with sophistication
they did it with overwhelming technical
efforts and it was an active measures
campaign driven from the top of that
government there is no fuzz on that it
is a high confidence judgment of the
entire intelligence community and and
the members of this committee have seen
the intelligence it's not a close call
that happened that's about as unfazed
you can possibly get and is very very
serious which is why it's so refreshing
to see a bipartisan focus on that
because this is about America not about
any particular party so that was a
hostile act by the Russian government
against this country yes sir
did the president in any of those
interactions that you've shared with us
today ask you what you should be doing
or what our government should be doing
or the intelligence community to protect
America against Russian interference in
our election system I don't recall a
conversation like that
never no do you find it now not with
President Trump right I attended a fair
number of meetings on that with the
President Obama do you find it odd that
the president seemed unconcerned by
Russia's actions in our election I
can't answer that because I don't know
what other conversations he had with
other advisors or other intelligence
community leaders so I I just don't know
sitting here did you have any
interactions with the president that
suggested he was taking that hostile
action seriously
I don't remember any interactions with
the president of other than the initial
briefing on January the 6th I don't
remember it could be wrong but I don't
remember any conversations him at all
about that as you're very aware it was
only the two of you in the room for that
dinner you've told us the president
asked you to back up the Flint
investigation the president told the
report not in that dinner fair enough
told the reporter he did never did that
you've testified that the president
asked for your loyalty in that dinner
the White House denies that a lot of
this comes down to who should we believe
do you want to say anything as to why we
should believe you probably my mother
raised me not to say things like this
about myself so I'm not going to I think
people should look at the whole body of
my testimony because as I used to say to
juries that when I talked about a
witness you can't cherry pick it you
can't say I like these things he said
but on this he's a he's a dirty rotten
liar but you got to take it all together
and I've tried to be open and fair and
transparent and accurate a really
significant fact to me is so why did he
kick everybody out of the Oval Office
why would you kick the Attorney General
the president the chief of staff out to
talk to me if it was about something
else and so that that to me is as an
investigator is a very significant fact
and as we look at at testimony or as
communication from both of you we should
probably be looking for consistency well
looking at any witness you look at
consistency track record demeanor record
over time that sort of thing thank you
so there are reports that the incoming
Trump administration either during the
transition and or after the inauguration
attempted to set up a
a sort of backdoor communication channel
with the Russian government using their
infrastructure their devices or
facilities what would be the risks
particularly for a transition someone
not actually in the office of the
president yet to setting up unauthorized
channels with a hostile foreign
government especially if they were to
evade our own American intelligence
services I'm not going to comment on
whether that happened in an open setting
but the risk is primary risk is obvious
you spare the Russians the cost and
effort of having to break into our
communications channels by using theirs
and so you make it a whole lot easier
for them to capture all of your
conversations and then to use those to
the benefit of Russia against the United
States the memos that you wrote
you wrote did you write all nine of them
in a way that was designed to prevent
them from needing classification no and
on a few of the occasions I wrote I sent
emails and my chief of staff or others
on some of the brief phone conversations
that I recall the first one was a
classified briefing although it wasn't
it asked if it was in a conference room
at Trump Tower it was a classified
briefing and so I wrote that on a
classified device the one I started type
engine in the car that was a classified
laptop that I started working on any
reason in a classified environment in a
skiff that this committee would it would
not be appropriate to see those
communications from at least from your
perspective as the author no Thank You
mr. chairman senator blunt Thank You mr.
chairman mr. call me when you were
terminated at the FBI I said and still
continue to feel that you have provided
years of great service to the country I
also said that I'd had significant
questions over the last year about some
of the decisions you made if if the
president hadn't terminated your service
would you still be in your opinion the
director of the FBI today yes sir
so you took as a direction from the
president something that you thought was
serious and troublesome but continued to
show up for work the next day yes sir
and six weeks later were still telling
that we're telling the president on
March the 30th that he was not
personally the target of any
investigation correct on March the 30th
and I think again Ani I think on April
11th as well I told him we're not
investigating him personally that was
true well the point to me the concern to
me there is that all these things are
going on you now in retrospect or at
least you now to this committee that
these were you had serious concerns
about what the president had you believe
directed you to do and had taken no
action hadn't even reported up the chain
of command
assuming you believe there isn't up the
chain of command that these things had
happened do you have a sense of that
looking back that that was a mistake
no in fact I think no action was the
most important thing I could do to make
sure there was no interference with the
investigation and on the on the Flynn
issues specifically I believe you said
earlier that you believe the president
was suggesting you drop any
investigation of Flynn's account of his
conversation with the Russian ambassador
which was essentially misleading the
vice president and others correct and
and I'm not going to into the details
but whether there were false statements
made to government investigators as well
the any suggestion that the general
Flynn had violated the Logan Act I
always find pretty incredible the Logan
acts been on the books for over 200
years nobody's ever been prosecuted for
violating the Logan Act my sense would
be that the discussion not the problem
misleading investigators or the vice
president might have been that's fair
yes sir
and in your had you previously on
February the 14th discussed with the
president and the previous meeting
anything your investigators had learned
or their impressions from talking to
Flynn no sir
so he said he's a good guy you said he's
a good guy and that was no further
action taken on that but he said more
than that but there was no the action
was wrote it up briefed our senior team
tried to figure out what to do with it
and it's made a decision we're going to
hold this and then see what we make of
it down the road yes sir was it your
view that not briefing up meant you
really had no responsibility to report
that to the Justice Department in some
way I think at some point and I don't
know what director Muller is going to do
with it but at some point I was sure we
were going to brief it to the team in
charge of the case but our judgment was
in the short-term doesn't make sense
through no fuzz on the fact I reported
to the Attorney General that's why I
stressed he shouldn't be kicked out of
the room but didn't make sense to report
to him now you know you said the
Attorney General said I don't want to be
in the room with him alone again but you
continued to talk to him on the phone
what is the difference in being in the
room alone with him and talking to him
on the phone alone yeah I think I would
I stress the change I was a little
broader than just the room I said you I
report to you it's very important you be
between me and the White House but after
that discussion with the Attorney
General did you take phone calls from
the president yes sir so why did you
just say you need to talk to it when you
say I'm not taking that call you need to
talk to the Attorney General
well I all I did on the April 11th call
and I reported the calls the March 30th
call in the April 11th call to my
superior who was the Acting Deputy
Attorney General I don't want to run out
of time here let me make one other point
in reading your testimony January the
3rd January the 27th and March the 30th
it appears to me that on all three of
those occasions you unsolicited by the
president made the point to him that he
was not a target of an investigation
correct yes sir
one I thought the March 30th very
interesting you said well even though
you don't want you may not want to step
was the 27th where he said why don't you
look into that dossier thing more you
said well you may not want that because
then we couldn't tell you you couldn't
say with
we couldn't answer the question about
you being a target of the investigation
but you didn't seem to be in answering
that question
anyhow senator Rubio pointed out the one
unanswered unli question seems to have
been that in this whole period of time
but you said something earlier I don't
want to fail to follow up on you said
after you were dismissed you gave
information to a friend so that friend
could get that information into the
public media correct what kind of
information was that was not what kind
of information did you give to a friend
that the pred the the Flint conversation
that the President had asked me to let
the Flint
man forgetting my exact own words but
the conversation in the Oval Office
so you didn't consider your memo or your
sense of that conversation to be a
government document you considered to be
somehow your own personal document that
you could share with the media as you
wanted to correct my friend I understood
this to be my recollection recorded of
my conversation with the president as a
private citizen I felt free to share
that I thought of very important to get
it out so we're all of your memos that
you recorded on classified or other
documents memos that might be yours as a
private citizen I'm sorry I'm not
following the question well I think you
said you'd use classified classified oh
you're not the classified documents
unclassified I don't have any of them
anymore but gave them to the Special
Counsel but yet my view was that the
content of those unclassified the
memorialization of those conversations
was my recollection recorded so why
didn't you give those to somebody
yourself rather than give them through a
third party because I was worried the
media was camping at the end of my
driveway at that point and I was
actually going out of town with my wife
to hide and I worried it would be like
feeding seagulls at the beach if if it
was if it was I who gave it to the media
so I asked my friend make sure this gets
out it does seem to me that what you do
there is create a source close to the
former director of the FBI as opposed to
just taking responsibility yourself for
saying here are these records and like
everybody else I have other things I'd
like to get into but
I'm out of time okay senator King thank
you first I'd like to acknowledge
senator Blumenthal and earlier senator
Nelson I think the one principal thing
you'll learn today senator is that the
chairs they're less comfortable than the
chairs here but welcome you to the
hearing mr. Comey
a broad question was the Russian
activity in the 2016 election a one-off
proposition or is this part of a
long-term strategy will they be back oh
it's a long-term practice of theirs it
stepped up a notch in a significant way
in 16 they'll be back
I think that's very important for the
American people to understand that this
is this is very much a forward-looking
investigation in terms of how do we
understand what they did and how do we
prevent it would you agree that that's a
big part of our role here yes sir and
it's not a Republican thing or a
democratic thing it really is an
American thing they're going to come for
whatever party they choose to try and
work on behalf of and they're not
devoted to either in my experience
they're just about their own advantage
and they will be back that's my
observation I don't think Putin is a
Republican or a Democrat he's an
opportunist I think that's a fair
statement uh with regard to the several
of these conversations in his interview
with Lester Holt on NBC the president
said I had dinner with him he wanted to
have dinner because he wanted to stay on
is this an accurate statement no sir did
you in any way initiate that dinner no
he called he called me at my desk at
lunchtime and asked me was I free for
dinner that night and called himself and
said can you come over for dinner
tonight I said yes sir he said well six
work I think he said six first and he
said I was going to bite your whole
family but we'll do that next time I
want you to come over and is that a good
time I said sir whatever works for you
and then he said how about 6:30 and I
said whatever works for you sir and then
I hung up and had to call my wife and
break a date with her I was supposed to
take her out to dinner that night and
that's one of the all-time great excuses
for breaking it happen
in retrospect I would have loved
spending time with my wife I wish I had
been there that night that's one
question I'm not gonna follow up mr.
cook but in that same interview the
president said in one case I called him
and in one case he called me is that an
accurate statement no did you ever call
the president
no I yeah I might the only reason I'm
hesitating is I think there was at least
one conversation where I was asked to
call the White House switchboard to be
connected to him
but I never initiated a communication
with the president uh and it is press
conference on May 18th the president was
asked whether he had urged you to shut
down the investigation to Michael Flynn
the president responded quote no no next
question is that an accurate statement I
don't believe it is
thank you with regard to the question of
him being under personal personally
under investigation does that mean that
the dossier is not being reviewed or
investigated or followed up on in any
way I obviously can't come I can't
comment either way I can't talk in an
open setting about the investigation as
it was when I was the head of the FBI
and obviously it's it's director
Muller's Bob Muller's responsibility now
so I just I don't know so clearly your
statements to the president back in
those these various times when you
assured him he wasn't under
investigation whereas of that moment
that correct is it right correct now on
the Flyn investigation is it not true
that mr. Flynn was and is a central
figure in this entire investigation of
the relationship between the Trump
campaign and the Russians I can't answer
that in an open setting sir uh and
certainly mr. Flynn was part of the
so-called Russian investigation can you
answer that question I have to give you
the same answer all right we'll be
having a closed session shortly so we
will follow up on that in terms of his
comments to you about I think you're in
response to mr. rish just sent her wrist
you said he said I hope you will hold
back on that but when you get it when a
president in the United States in the
Oval Office says something like I hope
or I suggest or
would you do take that as a directive
yes yes it rings in my ear as kind of
well no one rid me of this meddlesome
priest I was just going to quote that in
1170 December 29 henry ii said who will
rid me of this meddlesome priest and
then the next day he was killed
thomas a becket as exactly the same
situation you're we're thinking along
the same lines of several other
questions and these are a little bit
more detailed what do you know about the
Russian bang VEB nothing that I can talk
about in an open setting well I know it
ignore my next three quests yes sir you
know it exists what is the relationship
of ambassador the Ambassador from Russia
to the United States to the Russian
intelligence infrastructure well he's a
diplomat who is the chief of mission at
the Russian embassy which employs a
robust cohort of intelligence officers
and so surely he's witting of they're
very very aggressive intelligence
operations least some of it in the
United States I don't I don't consider
him to be an intelligence officer
himself he's a diplomat did you ever did
the FBI ever brief the Trump
administration about knew the
advisability of interacting directly
with ambassador Kissel yeah
Nicola can say sitting here is there
were a variety of defensive briefings
given to the incoming administration
about the counterintelligence risk back
to mr. Flynn would the wood closing out
the Flynn investigation have impeded the
overall Russian investigation no it
unlikely except to the extent there's
always a possibility if you have a
criminal case against someone and you
bring it and squeeze them you flip them
and they give you information about
something else but I saw the two as
touching each other but separate
with regard to your memos isn't it true
that in a court case when you're
weighing evidence contemporaneous memos
and contemporary contemporaneous
statements to third parties are
considered probative in terms of the the
the validity of testimony yes thank you
Thank You mr. chairman senator cotton
excuse me senator Langford well director
Comey could see again - we've had
multiple opportunities to be able to
visit as everyone on this daya's has and
I appreciate you and your service and
what you have done for the nation for a
long time what you continue to do I've
told you before in the heat of last year
and we had the opportunity to visit
personally that I pray for you and for
your family because you do carry a
tremendous amount of stress and that is
still true today Thank You Mia let me
walk through a couple things with you
your notes are obviously exceptionally
important because they give a very rapid
account of what you what you wrote down
and what you perceive to happen in those
different meetings have you had
opportunity to be able to reference
those notes when you were preparing the
written statement that you put for us
today yes I yes I think nearly all of my
written recordings of the conversations
had a chance to review them before
filing my statement do you have a copy
of any of those notes
personally I don't I turn them over to
Bob Muller's investigators the
individual that you told about your
memos that then sent on to the New York
Times did they have a copy of those
memos or where they told orally of those
memos had a copy I had a copy of the
time do they do they still have a copy
of those memos it's a good question I
think so I guess I can't say for sure
sitting here but I I guess I don't know
but I think so so the question is could
you ask them to hand that copy right
back to you so you could hand them over
to this committee potentially I would
like to move that from potential to see
if we can ask that question so we can
have a copy of those obviously those
notes are exceptionally important to us
how to be able go through the process so
we can we can continue to get to the
facts as we see it as you know the
written documents are exceptionally
important but there other documents that
we need to be aware of that you used in
your preparation for your written
statement that we should
also have that would assist us in
helping with this not that I'm aware of
no past the February the 14th meeting
which is a very important meeting
obviously as we discuss the
conversations here about Michael Flynn
when the president asked you about he
hopes that you would let this go and the
conversation back and forth about being
me being a good guy after that time did
the president ever bring up anything
about Michael Flynn again to you you had
multiple other conversations you have
documented with the president no I don't
remember him ever bringing it up but did
any member of the White House staff ever
come to you and talk to you about
letting go of the Michael Flynn case or
dropping it or anything referring to
that no the Director of National
Intelligence come to you and talk to you
about that
no did anyone from the attorney
general's office the Department of
Justice ask you about that
no did the head of NSA talk to you about
that no the the key aspect here is if
this seems to be something the
president's trying to get you to drop it
this seems like a pretty light touch to
drop it to bring it up at that moment
the day after he had just fired Flynn to
come back in and say I hope we can let
this go but then it never reappeared
again did it slow down your
investigation or any investigation that
may or may not be occurring with Michael
Flynn no though I don't know there are
any manifestations outward
manifestations of the investigation
between February 14th and when I was
fired so I I don't know that the
President of any way of knowing whether
it was effective or not
okay it's fair enough if if the
president wanted to stop an
investigation how would he do that
knowing it's an ongoing criminal
investigation or counterintelligence
investigation would that be a matter of
trying to go to you you perceive and to
say you make it stop because he doesn't
have the authority to stop or how how
would the president make an ongoing
investigation stop again I'm not a legal
scholar so smarter people answer this
better but I think as a legal matter
president is the head of the executive
branch and could direct in theory we
have important norms against this but
direct that anybody be investigator
anybody not be investigated I think he
has the legal authority because all of
us ultimately report an executive branch
up
the president would that be to you would
that be the Attorney General would that
be to who that would do that suppose you
could do it if you want to issue a
direct order could do it in any way
could do it through the Attorney General
or issue it directly to me well is there
any question that the president is not
real fond of this investigation I can
think of multiple hundred and forty word
character expressions that he's done
publicly to express he's not fond to the
investigations I've heard you shared
before in this conversation that you're
trying to keep the agents that are
working on it
away from any comic the president might
have made where frankly the president
has informed around six billion people
that he's not real fond of this
investigation do you think there's a
difference in that yes okay well there's
a big difference in kicking superior
officers out of the Oval Office looking
the FBI director in the eye and saying
hope you let this go I think if our if
the agents as good as they are heard the
president knighted States did that it's
you there's a real risk of a chilling
effect on their work that's why we kept
it so tight okay
you had mentioned before about some news
stories and news accounts without having
to go into all the names in the specific
times and to be able to dip and all that
have there been news accounts about the
Russian investigation about collusion
about this whole event or accusations
that as you read the story you were
stunned about how wrong they got the
facts yes there been many many stories
purportedly based on classified
information about about lots of stuff
but especially about Russia that are
just dead wrong I was interested in your
comment that you made as well that the
president said to you if there were some
satellite associates of his that did
something wrong it would be good to find
that out but the president seemed to
talk to you specifically on March the
30th and say I'm frustrated that the
word is not getting out that I'm not
under investigation but if there are
people that are in my circle that are
let's finish the investigation is that
how you took it as yes sir yes and then
you made a comment earlier about the
Attorney General previous Attorney
General asking you about the
investigation on the Clinton
males saying that you've been asked not
to call it investigation anymore but to
call it a matter and you had said that
confused you can you give us additional
details on that well it concerned me
because we're at the point where we had
refused to confirm the existence as we
typically do of an investigation for
months and it was getting to a place
where that looks silly because the
campaigns were talking about interacting
with the FBI in the course of our work
the Clinton campaign at the time was
using all kinds of euphemisms security
review matters things like that for what
was going on we were getting to a place
where the attorney Jo and I were both
gonna have to testify and talk publicly
about it and I want to know was she
going to authorize us to confirm we had
an investigation and she said yes but
don't call it that call it a matter and
I said why would I do that
and she said just call it a matter and
again you look back in hindsight you
think should I have resisted harder I
just said all right isn't worth this is
an ill worth dying on and so I just said
okay the press is going to completely
ignore it and that's what happened when
I said we have opened a matter they all
reported the FBI has an investigation
open and so that concerned me because
that language tracked the way the
campaign was talking about the FBI's
work and that that's concerning it gave
the impression that the campaign was
somehow using the same language the FBI
because you were handed the campaign
language and told to be able to use the
campaign but and I get out of whether it
was intentional or not but it gave the
impression that the Attorney General was
looking to align the way we talked about
our work with the way political campaign
was describing the same activity which
was inaccurate
we had a criminal investigation open
with as I've said before the Federal
Bureau of Investigation we had an
investigation open at the time and so
that gave me a queasy feeling thank you
senator Manchin Thank You mr. chairman
Thank You mr. Comey I appreciate very
much your being here West Virginians are
very interested in this and in this
hearing that we're having today I've had
over 600 requests for questions to ask
you for my fellow West Virginians and
most of them have been asked and there's
quite a few of them we're quite detailed
while asking our classified hearing I
want to thank you for
of all for coming and green to be here
volunteering but also volunteering to
stay into the classified hearing I don't
know if you had a chance to watch our
hearing yesterday I watched part of it
yes much and it was quite troubling my
colleagues here had some very pointed
questions they want answers - they
weren't classified they could have
answered this open setting they refused
to do so so that even much makes us much
more appreciative of your cooperation
sir the seriousness of the Russian
aggressions in our past elections and
knowing that it'll be ongoing and
Senator King had alluded to this what's
your concerns there I mean what what
should American public understand people
said well this is a why we worried about
this why make such a big deal now this
Russian investigation can you tell me
what your thoughts Ghazi and then the
final thing is on this same topic did
the president ever show any concern or
interest or curiosity about what the
Russians were doing Thank You senator as
I said earlier I don't remember any
conversations with the president about
the Russia election interference did he
ever ask you any questions concerning
this well there was an initial briefing
of our findings and I think there was
conversation there I don't remember it
exactly where he asked questions about
what we had found and what our sources
were what our confidence level was but
after that I don't remember anything
what the reason this is such a big deal
has we have this big messy wonderful
country where we fight with each other
all the time but nobody tells us what to
think what to fight about what to vote
for except other Americans and that's
wonderful and often painful but we're
talking about a foreign government that
using technical intrusion lots of other
methods tried to shape the way we think
we vote we act that is a big deal and
people need to recognize it it's not
about Republicans or Democrats they're
coming after America which I hope we all
love equally they want to undermine our
credibility in the face of the world
they think that this great experiment of
ours is a threat to them and so they're
going to try to run it down and dirty it
up as much as possible that's what this
is about and they will be back because
we remain as as difficult as we can be
with each other we remain that shining
city on the hill and they
don't like it this is extremely
important is extremely dangerous what
would what we're dealing with and it's
needed is what you're saying yes sir
do you believe there were any tapes or
recordings of your conversations with
the president it never occurred to me
till the president's tweet I'm not being
facetious I hope there are and I'll
consent to the release of the both of
you both of you are in the same findings
here you both hope there's tapes and
recordings well I'm new all I can do is
hope the president surely knows whether
he taped me and if he did my feelings
aren't hurt release the entire release
all the tapes I'm good with it
got you sir do you believe that Robert
Mueller the our new special investigator
on Russia will be thorough and complete
without political intervention and would
you be confidence on these findings and
recommendations yes Bob Muller is one of
the finest people and public servants
this country has ever produced he will
do it well he is a dogged tough person
and you can have high confidence that
when it's done he's turned over all the
rocks you've been asked a wide variety
of Crush of questions today
and then we're going to be hearing more
I'm sure in our classified hearing
something I'll often ask folks when they
come here what details of this saga
would be should we be focusing on and
what would you recommend us do
differently hmm or to just our
perspective on this I don't know I one
of the reasons that I'm pleased to be
here is I think this committee has shown
the American people although we have two
parties and we disagree about important
things we can work together when
involves the core inches of the country
so I would hope you'll just keep doing
what you're doing it's good in and of
itself but it's also a model especially
for kids that we we are a functioning
adult democracy and you also mention you
mad I think what two six six meetings
three times in person six on the phone
nine times in conversation of the
president did he ever at that time
allude that you are not performing
adequately ever indicate that at all no
in fact the contrary quite often yeah he
called me one day I was about to get on
a helicopter the head of the DEA was
waiting in the helicopter for me and he
just called to check in and tell me I
was doing an awesome job
and want to see how I was doing I said
I'm doing fine sir and then I finished a
call got on the helicopter mr. Comey do
you believe you would have been fired if
Hillary Clinton had become president
that's a great question I don't know
yeah I don't know you have any thoughts
about him no I might have been I I don't
know look I I've said before that was an
extraordinarily difficult and painful
time I think I did what I had to do I
knew it was gonna be very bad for me
personally and the consequence of that
might have been filler Clint was elected
I might have been terminated I don't
know I really don't my final question
will be after February 14th meeting in
the Oval Office you mentioned that you
asked Ernie general sessions to in short
that you were never left alone with the
president did you ever consider why
Attorney General Sessions was not asked
to stay in the room oh sure I did and
and have and in that moment I never
talked to him about no you never had
discussions with Jeff sessions on this
no not at all
on any of your meetings no did he
inquired he did he show any inquiry
whatsoever what was that meeting about
no oh you're right I did say to him I'd
forgotten this when I talked to him and
said you have to be between me and the
president and that's incredibly
important and I forget my exact words I
passed along the President's message
about the importance of aggressively
pursuing leaks of classified information
which is a goal I share and I passed
that along to the Attorney General I
think it was the next morning in our in
a meeting and but I did not tell about
the Flynn part you believe this arrives
to the obstruction of justice I don't
know that's Bob Muller's job to sort
that out
thank you sir
he's chairman senator cotton mr. Comey
you encouraged the president to release
the tapes will you encourage the
department justice or your friend at
Columbia or mr. Muller to release your
memos sure you said that you did not
record your conversations with President
Obama or President Bush and memos did
you do so with attorney general sessions
or any other senior member of the Trump
Department of Justice no did you I think
you I'm sorry did you record
conversations and memos with attorney
general Lynch or any other senior member
of the Obama Department of Justice no
not that I recall in your statement for
the record you cite nine private
conversations with the president three
meetings and two phone calls there are
four phone calls that are not discussed
in your statement for the record what
happened in those phone calls President
called me I believe shortly before I was
inaugurated as a follow-up to our
conversation private conversation on
January the 6th he just wanted to
reiterate his rejection of the
allegation and talk about he thought
about it more and why he thought it
wasn't true the the the verified
unverified in salacious parts and during
that call he asked me again hope you're
going to stay you're doing a great job
and I told them that I intended to
there was another phone call that I
mentioned I think was good of the day
wrong March the first where he called
just to check in with me as I was about
to get on the helicopter there was a
secure call we had about an an
operational matter that was not related
to any of this that's something the FBI
was working on he wanted to make sure
that I understood how important he
thought it was totally appropriate call
and then the fourth call probably
forgetting may have been I may have
meant the call when he called to invite
me to dinner I'll think about it as I'm
answering other questions but I think I
got that right let's turn our attention
to the underlying activity at issue here
Russia's hacking into those emails and
releasing them the allegations of Cole
illusion do you believe Donald Trump
colluded with Russia it's a question I
don't think I should answer in an open
setting as I said that we didn't when I
left we did not have an investigation
focused on President Trump but that's a
question that will be answered by the
investigation I think let me turn to a
couple statements by one of my
colleagues senator Feinstein she was the
ranking member on this committee until
January which means she had access to
information that only she and chairman
Byrd ed she's now the senior Democrat on
the Judiciary Committee meaning she has
access to the FBI that most of us don't
on May 3rd
I'm CNN's Wolf Blitzer show she was
asked do you believe do you have
evidence there was in fact collusion
between Trump associates in Russia
during the campaign she answered not at
this time on May 18th the same show mr.
Blitzer said the last time we spoke
senator asked if you had actually seen
any evidence of collusion between the
Trump campaign in the Russians and you
said to me and I'm quoting you now you
said not at this time has anything
changed since we last spoke senator
Feinstein said well no no it hasn't
do you have any reason to doubt those
statements I don't doubt the senator
Feinstein was saying with what she
understood I just don't want to go down
that path for something because I'm not
in the government anymore and answering
in the negative
I just where he leads me deeper and
deeper into talking about the
investigation in an open setting I don't
I want to be I'm always trying to be
fair no be unfair to President Trump I'm
not trying to suggest by my answer
something nefarious but I don't want to
get into the business of saying not as
to this person not as to that person On
February 14th the New York Times
published a story the headline of which
was Trump campaign aides had repeated
contacts with Russian intelligence
you're asked earlier if that was an
inaccurate story and you said in the
main would it be fair to characterize
that story is almost entirely wrong yes
did you have at the time that sort of
published any indication of any contact
between Trump people and Russians
intelligence officers other government
officials or close associates of the
Russian government that's when I can't
answer sitting here we can discuss that
in classified setting then I want to
turn attention now to mr. Flinn in the
allegations of his underlying conduct to
be specific his alleged interactions
with the Russian ambassador on the
telephone and then what he said to
senior Trump administration officials
and apartment justice officials I
understand there are other issues with
mr. Flynn
related to his receipt of foreign monies
or disclosure of potential advocacy
activity on behalf of foreign
governments those are serious and
credible allegations I'm sure will be
pursued but I want to speak specifically
about his interactions with the Russian
ambassador there was a story on January
23rd in the Washington Post it says
entitled FBI reviewed Flynn's calls with
Russian ambassador but found nothing
illicit is the story accurate I don't
want to comment on that senator because
I'm pretty sure the bureau has not
confirmed any interception of
communications and so I don't want to
talk about that in an open setting would
it be improper for an incoming national
security adviser to have a conversation
with a foreign ambassador might in my
experience know but you can't confirm or
deny that the conversation happened and
we would need to know the contents of
that conversation to know if it was in
fact improper yeah I don't think I can
talk about that an open setting I and
again I've been out of government now a
month so I don't also don't want to talk
about things when it's now somebody's
else's responsibility but maybe in the
in the classified setting we can talk
more about that you stated earlier that
there wasn't an open investigation of
mr. Flynn in the FBI did you or any FBI
agent ever since that mr. Flynn
attempted to deceive you or made false
statements to an FBI agent I don't want
to go too far that was the subject of
the criminal inquiry did you ever come
close to closing investigation on mr.
Flynn I don't think I can talk about
that in open setting either I can
discuss these mornings with a closed
setting then mr. Comey in 2004 you were
a part of a well publicized event about
a intelligence program that had been
recertified several times and you were
acting Attorney General when
Attorney General John Ashcroft was
incapacitated due to illness there was a
dramatic showdown at hospital here the
next day you've said that she wrote a
letter of resignation signed it before
you me went to meet with President Bush
to explain why you refused to certify it
is that accurate yes I think so at any
time in three and a half months you are
the FBI director during the Trump
administration did you ever write and
sign the letter of recommendation and
leave it on your desk
let her resignation no sir letter of
resignation no sir so despite all of the
things that you've testified to here
today
you didn't feel this rose to the level
of an honest but serious difference of
legal opinion between accomplished in
skilled lawyers in that 2004 episode I
wouldn't characterize the circumstances
in 2004 that way but to answer no I
didn't find encounter any circumstance
that led me to intend to resign consider
to resign no sir Thank You senator
Harris director Comey I want to thank
you you are now a private citizen and
you are enduring a Senate Intelligence
Committee hearing and each of us get
seven minutes instead of five is
yesterday to ask you questions so thank
you know from I'm between opportunities
like oh so well you're you you are I'm
sure you'll have future opportunities
you know you and I are both former
prosecutors not going to require you to
answer I just want to make a statement
that um in my my experience of
prosecuting cases when a robber held a
gun to somebody's head and and said I
hope you will give me your wallet the
word hope was not the most operative
word at that moment but all you don't
have to respond to that point I have a
series of questions to ask you and and
they're going to start with are you
aware of any meetings between the Trump
administration officials and Russian
officials during the campaign that have
not been acknowledged by those officials
in the White House
that's not it even if I remember clearly
that's not a question I can answer in an
open setting are you aware of any
efforts by Trump campaign officials or
associates of the campaign
to hide their communications with
Russian officials through encrypted
communications or other means I have to
give you the same answer senator sure in
the course of the FBI's investigation
did you ever come across anything that
suggested that communications records
documents or other evidence had been
destroyed I think I got to give you the
same answer because it would touch on
investigative matters and are you aware
of any efforts or potential efforts to
conceal communications between campaign
officials and Russian officials they got
to give you the same answer senator
thank you um as a former attorney
general I have a series of questions
about your connection with the Attorney
General during the course of your tenure
as director what is your understanding
of the parameters of General Sessions
recusal from the adverse Russia
investigation
I think it's described in a written
release or statement from DOJ which I
don't remember sitting here but just was
he would be recused from all matters
relating to Russia and that and the
campaign or activities of Russia and the
16 election I think something like that
is so is your knowledge of the extent of
his refusal based on the public
statements he's made or direct okay
so was there any kind of memorandum
issued from the Attorney General or the
Department of Justice to the FBI
outlining the parameters of his recusal
not that I'm aware of and do you know if
he reviewed any FBI or DOJ documents
pertaining to the investigation before
he was recused I don't I don't know and
after he was recused I'm assuming it's
the same answer same answer
and as aside from any notice or
memorandum that was not sent or was what
mechanism our processes were in place to
ensure that the Attorney General would
not have any connection with the
investigation to your knowledge I don't
know for sure I know that he had
consulted with career ethics officials
that know how to run a recusal at DOJ
but I don't know what mechanism they set
up and the Attorney General recused
himself from the investigation but do
you believe it was appropriate for him
to be involved in the firing of the
chief investigator of that case that
Russia interference that's something I
can't answer sitting here it's a it's a
reasonable question but that would
depend a lot of things I don't know like
what did he know
was he told did he realize that the
president was doing it because of the
Russia investigation things like that I
just don't know the answer you've
mentioned in your written testimony in
here that the president essentially
asked you for a loyalty pledge are you
aware of him making the same request of
any other members of the cabinet I'm not
do you know one way or another wait he I
don't know one way or another
I've never heard anything about it and
you mentioned that on you had the
conversation where he hoped that you
would let the Flynn matter go on
February 14th or there abouts it's my
understanding that mr. sessions was
recused from any involvement in the
investigation about a full two weeks
later to your knowledge was the Attorney
General did he have access to
information about the investigation in
those interim two weeks I I don't I in
theory sure because he's the Attorney
General I don't know whether he had any
contact with any materials related to
that to your knowledge was there any
directive that he should not have any
contact with any information about the
Russian investigation between the
February 14th date and the day he was
ultimately recused or recused himself on
March 2nd not to my knowledge I don't
know one way or another and did you
speak to the Attorney General about the
Russia investigation before his recusal
I don't think so no do you know if
anyone in the department and the FBI I
forwarded any documents or information
or memos of any sort to the attention of
the Attorney General before his recusal
I don't I don't know of any remember any
sitting here it's possible but I don't
remember any do you know if the Attorney
General was involved in fact involved in
any aspect of the Russia investigation
after his recusal on the 2nd of March I
don't I would assume not but I don't I
don't
well let me say this way I don't know of
any information that would lead me to
believe he did something to touch the
Russian investigation after the recusal
in your written testimony you indicate
that you when you after you were left
alone with the president you mentioned
that it was inappropriate and should
never happen again to the Attorney
General and apparently he did not reply
right that he did not reply what did he
do if anything did he just look at you
was there pause for a moment what
happened
I don't remember real clearly I have a
recollection of him just kind of looking
at me and there's a danger here I'm
projecting onto him so this may be a
faulty memory but I kind of got his body
language gave me the sense like what am
I gonna do
did he shrug all right I don't remember
clearly I think the reason I have that
impression is I have some recollection
of almost employment imperceptible like
what am I going to do but I don't have a
clear recollection of that he didn't say
anything and on that same February 14th
meeting you said you understood the
President to be requesting that you drop
the investigation after that meeting
however you received two calls from the
president March 30th and April 11th
where the president talked about a cloud
over his presidency has anything you've
learned in the months since your
February 14th meeting changed your
understanding of the President's request
I guess it would be what he has said pub
in public documents or public interviews
correct and is there anything about this
investigation that you believe is in any
way biased or is is is not being
informed by a process of seeking the
truth no the appointment of a special
counsel should offer great especially
given who that person is great comfort
to Americans no matter what your
political affiliation is that this will
be done independently competently and
honestly and do you believe that he
should have full authority mr. Muller to
be able to pursue that investigation yes
and I and knowing him well over the
years if there's something that he
thinks he needs he will he will speak up
about it you believe he should have full
independence oh yeah and he wouldn't be
part of it if he wasn't gonna get full
independence thank you senator Cornyn
Thank You mr. chairman mr. Comey off
I'll repeat what I've said at previous
hearings that I believe you're a good
and decent man who's been dealt a very
difficult hand starting back with the
Clinton email investigation
and I appreciate your willingness to
peer here today voluntarily and answer
our questions and cooperate with our
investigation as a general matter if an
FBI agent has reason to believe that a
crime has been committed do they have a
duty to report it that's a good question
I don't know that there's a legal duty
to report it they certainly have a
cultural ethical duty to report it
you're unsure whether they would have a
legal duty yeah it's a good question and
I've thought about for I don't know
where the legal is a statute that
prohibits misprision of a felony knowing
of a felony and taking steps to conceal
it but this is a different question and
so look let me be clear I would expect
any FBI agent as reason information
about a crime being committed to report
it me too
but where you rest that obligation I
don't know it exists and let me ask you
is a general proposition if you're
trying to make an investigation go away
is firing an FBI director a good way to
make that happen by that I mean it
doesn't make a lot of sense to me but
I'm obviously hopelessly biased given
that I was the one fired
I understand it's personal now given the
eight nature of the FBI I meant what I
said it's no indispensable people in the
world including at the FBI that there's
lots of bad things about me not being at
the FBI most of them are for me but the
work is going to go on as before
so nothing that's happened that you've
testified to here today has impeded the
investigation the FBI or director molars
commitment to get to the bottom of this
from the standpoint of the FBI and the
Department of Justice would you agree
with that correct especially the
appointment of director and former
director Muller is critical part of that
equation let me take you back to the
Clinton email investigation I think
you've been cast as a hero or a villain
depending on the whose political Gok ox
is being gored at many different times
during the course of the Clinton email
investigation even even now perhaps but
you clearly were troubled by
the conduct of the sitting attorney
general Loretta Lynch when a client came
to the Clinton email investigation you
mentioned the characterization that
you'd been asked except that this was a
matter and not a criminal investigation
which you said it it was there was the
matter of President Clinton's meeting on
the tarmac with the sitting Attorney
General at a time when his wife was a
subject to a criminal investigation and
you suggested that perhaps there are
other matters that you may be able to
share with us later on in a classified
setting but it seems to me that you
clearly believed that Loretta Lynch the
Attorney General had an appearance of a
conflict of interest on the Clinton
email investigation is that correct I
think that's fair I didn't believe she
could credibly decline that
investigation at least not without
grievous damage to the Department of
Justice and to the FBI and under
Department of Justice and FBI norms
wouldn't it have been appropriate for
the Attorney General or if she had
recused herself which she did not do for
the Deputy Attorney General to appoint a
special counsel that's essentially
what's happened now with director Muller
would that have been an appropriate step
in the Clinton email investigation in
your opinion certainly a possible step
yes sir and were you aware that miss
Lynch had been requested numerous times
to appoint a special counsel and it
refused front yes from I think Congress
had members of Congress had repeatedly
asked yes sir yours truly did on
multiple occasions and that heightened
your concerns about the appearance of a
conflict of interest with the Department
of Justice which caused you to make what
you have described as an incredibly
painful decision to basically take the
matter up yourself and led to that July
press conference yes sir I can say after
the President Clinton former President
Clinton met on the plane with the
Attorney General I considered whether I
should call for the appointment of a
special counsel and it decided that that
would be an unfair thing to do because I
knew there was no case there we had
investigated it very very thoroughly I
know this is a subject of passion it
just
agreement but I knew there was no case
there and calling for the appointment of
Special Counsel would be brutally unfair
because it would send the message
AHA there's something here that was my
judgment again lots of people have
different views of it but that's how I
thought about it well if the special
counsel had been appointed they could
have made that determination that there
was nothing there and declined to pursue
it right sure but it would have been
many months later or a year later let me
just ask you - given the experience of
the Clinton email investigation and what
happened there do you think it's
unreasonable for anyone any president
who has been assured on multiple
occasions that he's not the subject of
an FBI investigation do you think it's
unreasonable for them to want the FBI
director to publicly announce that so
that this cloud over his administration
would be removed I think that's a
reasonable point of view the concern
would be obviously because that
boomerang comes back it's a going to be
a very big deal because there will be a
duty to correct well we we saw that in
the Clinton email investigation yes I
recall that yeah I know you do so let me
ask you finally in the minute we have
left
there was this conversation back and
forth about loyalty and I think we all
appreciate the fact that FBI director is
a unique public official in the sense
that isn't it not he's a political
appointee in one sense but he has a duty
of Independence to pursue the law
pursuant to the Coty's got the
Constitution laws of the United States
and so when the president asks you about
loyalty you got in this back-and-forth
about well I pledge you my honesty and
then it looks like from what I've read
you agreed upon honest loyal tea or
something like that is that the
characterization yes
thank you very much thank you sir
Senator Reid Thank You mr. chairman
Thank You director Comey there have been
press reports that the president in
addition to asking you to drop the Flint
investigation has asked other senior
intelligence officials to take steps
which would tend to undermine the
investigation to Russia there's no
reports that he's asked DNI coats and
Admiral Rogers to make public statements
exonerating him or taking a pressure off
him and also reports about Admiral
Rogers and director Pompeo to intervene
and reach out to the FBI asked them are
you aware of any of these do you have
any information with respect to any of
these four allegation I don't I'm aware
of the public reporting but I had no
contact no conversation with any of
those leaders about that subject thank
you you have testified that you
interpret the discussion with the
president about Flynn as a direction to
stop the investigation is that correct
yes you've testified that the president
asked you to lift the cloud
by essentially making public statement
exonerating him and perhaps others you
refused correct I didn't I didn't do it
I didn't refuse the predator the
president I told him we would see what
we could do and then the second time he
called I told him in substance that's
something your lawyer will have to take
up with the Justice Department and part
of the underlying logic was that was
we've discussed many times throughout
this morning is the duty to correct that
is one of the theories but also for a
practical issue it was there your
feeling that the direction of the
investigation could in fact include the
president well
in theory I mean as I explained the
concern of one of my senior leader
colleagues was if you're looking at
potential coordination between the
campaign and Russia the person at the
head of the campaign is the candidate so
logically this person argued the
candidates knowledge understanding
logically become a part of your inquiry
if it proceeds and so I understood that
argument my view was that that what I
said to the president was accurate and
fair and fair to him I resisted the idea
of publicly saying it although if the
Justice Department had wanted to that I
would have done it because of the duty
to correct and the slippery slope
problem uh and again also you've
testified that the president asked you
repeatedly to be loyal to him and you
responded to you would be honest we
loyal which is I think your way of
saying I'll be honest and I'll be a head
of the FBI and independent of that fear
correct
I tried honest first and also you know
you've seen it in my Testament also
tried to explain to him why it's in his
interest and every president's interest
for the FBI to be a part in a way
because its credibility is important to
a president and to the country and so I
tried to hold the line hold line it got
very awkward and I then said you'll
always have honesty from me he said
honest loyal T and then I acceded to
that as a way to end this awkwardness at
the culmination of all these events
you're summarily fired any explanation
or anything else well there was an
explanation I just don't buy it
okay well ah yes so you're fired so do
you believe that you were fired because
you refused to cooperate to take the
president's direction that the ultimate
reason I don't know for sure I know I
was fired again I take the president's
words I know it was fired because of
something about the way I was conducting
the Russian investigation was in some
way putting pressure on him in some way
irritating him and he decided to fire me
because of that now I can't go farther
than that the Russian investigation as
you pointed out and as all my colleagues
have reflect is one of the most serious
hostile acts against this country in our
history undermining the very core of our
democracy in our elections is not a
discrete event it will likely occur it's
probably being prepared now for 18 and
20 and beyond and yet the president
United States and buys you because in
your own words some relation to this
investigation and then he shows up in
the Oval Office with the Russian Foreign
Minister first after classifying you as
crazy in a real nutjob which I think
you've effectively disproved this
morning he said I face crush pressure
because of Russia that's taken off your
conclusion would be that the president I
would think is downplaying the
seriousness of this threat in fact ya
took specific steps to stop a thorough
investigation of the Russian Edessa
Russian influence and also from what
you've said or what was said this
morning doesn't seem to particularly
interested in these hostile threats by
the Russians is that fear I don't know
that I can agree to that level of detail
there's no doubt that it's a fair
judgement it's my judgment that I was
fired because of the Russia
investigation I was fired in some way to
change or the endeavor was to change the
way the Russia investigation was being
conducted that is a that is a very big
deal and not just because it involves me
the nature of the FBI and the nature of
its work requires that it not be the
subject of political consideration and
on top of that you have the Russia
investigation itself is vital because of
the threat and I know I should have said
this earlier but it's obvious if any
Americans were part of helping the
Russians do that to us that is a very
big deal and I'm confident that if that
is the case director Muller will find
that evidence finally a the president
tweeted that James Connelly they hope
that there are no tapes of our
conversations where he starts leaking to
the press with that
rather unsubtle attempt to intimidate
you from testifying and intimidate
anyone else who seriously courses his
bath of not doing it I'm not going to
sit here and try to interpret the
president's tweets it to me it's major
impact was as I said occurred to me in
the middle of the night holy cow there
might be tapes and if there are tapes
it's not just my word against his on the
direction to get rid of the Flint
investigation thank you very much
Senator McCain in the case of Hillary
Clinton you made the statement that
there wasn't sufficient evidence to
bring a suit against her although it had
been very careless in their behavior but
you did reach a conclusion in that case
that it was not necessary to further
pursue her yet at the same time in the
case of mr. Comey you said that there
was not enough information to make a
conclusion tell me the difference
between your conclusion as far as former
Secretary Clinton is concerned to end
and mr. mr. Trump the Clinton
investigation was a completed
investigation that the FBI had been
deeply involved in and so I had an
opportunity to understand all the facts
and apply those facts against the laws I
understood them this investigation was
under way still going when I was fired
so it's nowhere near in the same place
least it wasn't when I was what is still
ongoing correct so far as I know it was
when I left that investigation was going
on this investigation is going on you
reach separate conclusions now that one
was done they only had the investigation
of any involvement of Secretary Clinton
or any of her associates is
completed yes as of July the fifth the
FBI completed its investigative work and
that's what I was announcing what we had
done and what we had found well at least
in the minds of this member there's a
whole lot of questions remaining about
what went on particularly considering
the fact that as you mentioned it's a
quote big deal as to what went on during
the campaign so I'm glad you concluded
that part of the investigation but I
think that the American people have a
whole lot of questions out there
particularly since you just emphasized
the role that Russia played and
obviously she was a candidate for
president at the time so she was clearly
involved in this whole situation where
fake news as you just described it big
deal took place you're going to have to
help me out here in other words we're
complete the investigation of anything
that former Secretary Clinton had to do
with the campaign is over and we don't
have to worry about it anymore
with respect to secretin fused center
with respect to Secretary Clinton yeah
we investigated criminal investigation
in connection with her use of a personal
email server understand and that's the
investigation I announced inclusion of
on July 5th
so clicked in at the same time you made
the announcement there would be no
charges brought against then Secretary
Clinton for any activities involved in
the Russia involvement in our engagement
in our election I don't quite understand
how you could be done with that but not
complete done with the whole
investigation of their attempt to affect
the outcome of our election no I'm sorry
we're not at least when I left when I
was fired on may tonight there was still
an open active investigation to
understand the Russian efforts and
whether any Americans work with them but
you reach the conclusion that there was
no reason to bring charges against
Secretary Clinton so you reached a
conclusion
in the case of mr. Comey you the
president call me search me case of
present Trump you have an ongoing
investigation so you got one candidate
who you're done with and another
candidate that you have a long way to go
is that correct I don't know how far the
FBI has to go but yes that the Clinton
email investigation was completed the
investigation of Russia's efforts in
connection with the election and whether
there was any coordination and if so
with whom between Russia in the campaign
he just was ongoing when I left you just
made it clear and what you said this is
a quote big deal unquote I think it's
hard to reconcile you in one case you
reach complete conclusion and the other
side you have you have not and you in
fact obviously there's a lot more there
as as we know as you called it a quote
big deal she's one of the candidates but
in her case you say there will be no
charges and in the case of President
Trump there the investigation continues
what has been brought out in this
hearing is is more and more emphasis on
the Russian engagement and involvement
in this campaign how serious do you
think this was very serious but I I want
to say some be clear it was we have not
announced and there was no predication
to announce an investigation of whether
the Russians may have coordinated with
secretary Clinton's campaign secretary
Clinton's kaleb they may not have been
involved with their campaign they were
involved with the entire presidential
campaign obviously of course yes sir
and that that is an investigation that
began last summer and so far as I'm
aware continues so both president Trump
and former candidate Clinton are both
involved in the investigation yet one of
them you said there's going to be no
charges and the other one that the
investigation continues well I think
there's a double standard there to tell
you the truth
then when the president said to you you
talked about the April 11th phone call
and he said poke because I've been very
loyal to you very loyal we had that
thing you know did that arouse your
curiosity is what quote that thing was
yes why didn't you ask him it didn't
seem to me to be important for the
conversation we were having to
understand it I took it to be some an
effort to to communicate to me this that
there is a relationship between us where
I've been good to you you should be good
to me yeah but I think it would
intensely arouse Mike curiosity if the
president I state said we had that thing
you know I'd like to know what the hell
that thing is
particularly if I'm the director of the
FBI yeah I get that senator honestly
I'll tell you what this is speculation
but what I concluded at the time is in
his memory he was searching back to our
encounter at the dinner and was
preparing himself to say I offered
loyalty you you promise loyalty to me
and all of a sudden his memory showed
him that did not happen
and I think he pulled up short that's
just a guess but a lot of conversations
with humans over the years think I would
have had some curiosity if it have been
about me be honest with you so are you
aware anything that would believe you to
believe that the president other members
the administration or members the
campaign could potentially be used to
coerce or blackmail the administration
that's a subject for investigations not
something I can comment on sitting here
but you reach that conclusion as far as
Secretary Clinton was concerned but
you're not reaching a conclusion as far
as this administration is concerned are
you aware of anything that would lead
you to believe that information exists
that could coerce members of the
administration or blackmail the
administration that's not a question I
can answer
senator Souter's times expired
thank you all times expired for the
hearing can I say four members will
reconvene promptly at 1:00 p.m. in the
hearing room we have a vote scheduled
for 1:45 I would suggest that all
members promptly be there at 1:00
o'clock we have about three minutes I'd
like to have order
photographers photographers return to
where you were
please this hearings not adjourned yet
hear that it will remove you to members
we have about three minutes of updates
that we would love to cover as soon as
we get into the closed session before we
have an opportunity to spend some time
with director Comey based on our
agreement it would be my intentions to
adjourn that closed hearing between two
and two ten so that members can go vote
and I would urge you to eat at that time
Jim
several of us on this committee have had
the opportunity to work with you since
you walked in the door I want to say
personally on behalf of all this all the
committee members we're grateful to you
for your service to your country not
just in the capacity as FBI director but
it's prosecutor and more importantly
being somebody that loves this country
enough to tell it like it is I want to
say to your workforce that we're
grateful to them with the level of
cooperation that they have shown us with
the trust we've built between both
organizations the Congress and and the
bureau we couldn't do our job if it
wasn't for their willingness to share
candidly with us the work that we need
to see this hearings the ninth public
hearing this committee has had this year
that is twice the historical year-long
average of this committee I think the
vice chairman and my's biggest challenge
when this investigation has concluded is
to return our hearings to the secrecy of
a closed hearing to encourage our
numbers not to freely talk about
intelligence matters publicly and to
respect the fact that we have a huge job
and that's to represent the entire body
of the United States Senate and the
American people to make sure that we
work with the intelligence community to
provide you the tools to keep America
safe and that you do it within the legal
limit or those limits that are set by
the executive branch we could not do it
if it wasn't for trusted partnership
that you have been able to lead and
others before you so as we depart from
this this is a pivotal hearing in our
investigation we're grateful to you for
the professionalism you've shown and
your willingness I will turn to the vice
chairman I simply want to echo want to
get into thanks for your appearance and
there clearly still remain a number of
questions and the one thing I want to
commit to you and more importantly I
think the chimer I want to commit to all
those who are still potentially watching
and following there's still a lot of
unanswered question and we're going to
get to the bottom of this where I get
the facts out the American people
deserve to know there's the questions
around implications of Trump officials
and the Russians but there's also the
macro issue of what the Russians did and
continue to do and I think it is very
important that all Americans realize
that threat is real it is continuous it
is not just towards our nation it is all
towards all Western democracies and we
have to come to a solution setter
Thank You mr. chairman director Comey
thank you once again on behalf of the
committee this year into jury
it's hot
no problem
so look
thank you
[Music]
thank you back it up
right there yeah Russell
Sherman